# Caitlin Clark

**Caitlin Clark** (born January 22, 2002) is an American professional
[basketball](basketball "wikilink") player for the [Indiana
Fever](Indiana_Fever "wikilink") of the [Women's National Basketball
Association](Women's_National_Basketball_Association "wikilink") (WNBA).
She played [college basketball](college_basketball "wikilink") for the
[Iowa Hawkeyes](Iowa_Hawkeyes_women's_basketball "wikilink") and is
regarded as one of the greatest collegiate players of all time. Clark is
the [NCAA Division I](NCAA_Division_I "wikilink") all-time leading
scorer and was a two-time national player of the year with the Hawkeyes.
She was selected [first
overall](List_of_first_overall_WNBA_draft_picks "wikilink") by the Fever
in the [2024 WNBA draft](2024_WNBA_draft "wikilink").

Clark attended [Dowling Catholic High
School](Dowling_Catholic_High_School "wikilink") in her hometown of
[West Des Moines, Iowa](West_Des_Moines,_Iowa "wikilink"), where she was
named a [McDonald's
All-American](McDonald's_All-American_Game "wikilink") and rated the
fourth-best player in her class by [ESPN](ESPN "wikilink"). In her
[freshman](freshman "wikilink") season with Iowa, she led the NCAA
Division I in scoring and earned
[All-American](NCAA_Women's_Basketball_All-Americans "wikilink") honors.
As a [sophomore](sophomore "wikilink"), Clark was a unanimous first-team
All-American and became the first women's player to lead Division I in
[points](point_(basketball) "wikilink") and
[assists](Assist_(basketball) "wikilink") in a single season. In her
[junior](Junior_(education_year) "wikilink") season, she was the
national player of the year and led Iowa to its first [national
championship
game](2023_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_championship_game "wikilink").
Clark again led Division I in assists and set Big Ten single-season
marks in points and assists. As a
[senior](Senior_(education) "wikilink"), she repeated as national player
of the year and helped Iowa return to the [national title
game](2024_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_championship_game "wikilink").
Clark became the Division I career and single-season leader in points
and [three-pointers](Three-point_field_goal "wikilink") and broke the
all-time conference record in assists, while leading the nation in both
points and assists.

At the youth international level, Clark has won three gold medals with
the United States, including two at the [FIBA Under-19 Women's World
Cup](FIBA_Under-19_Women's_Basketball_World_Cup "wikilink"), where she
was named [Most Valuable
Player](FIBA_Under-19_Women's_Basketball_World_Cup_Most_Valuable_Player "wikilink")
in 2021. During her college career, she helped popularize [women's
basketball](women's_basketball "wikilink"), with her games surpassing
attendance and television viewership records for the sport.

## Early life

Clark was born on January 22, 2002, in [Des Moines,
Iowa](Des_Moines,_Iowa "wikilink"), and grew up in [West Des
Moines](West_Des_Moines,_Iowa "wikilink").[1][2] She started playing
basketball at age five and competed in boys' [recreational
leagues](Intramural_sports "wikilink"), because her father could not
find a girls' league for her age group.[3][4] Clark also played
[softball](softball "wikilink"), [volleyball](volleyball "wikilink"),
[soccer](association_football "wikilink"), [tennis](tennis "wikilink"),
and [golf](golf "wikilink") as a child before focusing on
basketball.[5][6] At age 13, she began playing several years ahead of
her age group in girls' leagues.[7] In [sixth
grade](sixth_grade "wikilink"), Clark joined All Iowa Attack, an
[Amateur Athletic Union](Amateur_Athletic_Union "wikilink") (AAU)
basketball program based in [Ames, Iowa](Ames,_Iowa "wikilink"), for
whom she played until graduating from high school.[8][9] She was coached
by Dickson Jensen with Attack, and her AAU teammates included future
[Women's National Basketball
Association](Women's_National_Basketball_Association "wikilink") (WNBA)
player [Ashley Joens](Ashley_Joens "wikilink").[10][11][12] Clark drew
inspiration from [Maya Moore](Maya_Moore "wikilink") of the [Minnesota
Lynx](Minnesota_Lynx "wikilink"), the closest WNBA team to her hometown,
and traveled with her father for three-and-a-half hours to see their
games.[13] She admired All Iowa Attack alumnus [Harrison
Barnes](Harrison_Barnes "wikilink") and became a fan of the [North
Carolina Tar
Heels](North_Carolina_Tar_Heels_men's_basketball "wikilink") after
Barnes joined the program.[14]

## High school career

Clark played four years of [varsity](varsity_team "wikilink") basketball
for Dowling Catholic High School in West Des Moines under head coach
Kristin Meyer.[15] As a [freshman](freshman "wikilink"), she averaged
15.3 [points](point_(basketball) "wikilink"), 4.7 assists and 2.3
[steals](steal_(basketball) "wikilink") per game.[16] She earned Class
5A All-State third-team accolades from the Iowa Newspaper Association
and All-Iowa honorable mention from *[The Des Moines
Register](The_Des_Moines_Register "wikilink")*.[17][18] Clark led her
team to a 19–5 record and the Class 5A state tournament, where they lost
to eventual champions [Valley High
School](Valley_High_School_(West_Des_Moines,_Iowa) "wikilink") in the
first round.[19] In her [sophomore](sophomore "wikilink") season, she
averaged 27.1 points, 6.5 [rebounds](rebound_(basketball) "wikilink"), 4
assists and 2.3 steals per game, ranking second in the state in
scoring.[20][21] Clark was named first-team Class 5A All-State by the
Iowa Print Sports Writers Association (IPSWA) and [Central Iowa Metro
League](Central_Iowa_Metro_League "wikilink") Player of the Year by *The
Des Moines Register*.[22] She helped Dowling reach the Class 5A state
quarterfinals and achieve a 20–4 record.[23] Following the season, she
led All Iowa Attack to the [Nike Elite Youth Basketball
League](Nike_Elite_Youth_Basketball_League "wikilink") championship,
scoring 23 points in a 64–61 victory over the Cal Storm in the
final.[24]

On February 4, 2019, during her
[junior](Junior_(education_year) "wikilink") season, Clark scored 60
points in a 90–78 win against [Mason City High
School](Mason_City_High_School_(Iowa) "wikilink"). Her 60-point game was
the second-highest single-game point total in Iowa five-on-five girls'
basketball history, surpassed only by Abby Roe in 1996. She also set the
state single-game record with 13
[three-pointers](Three-point_field_goal "wikilink").[25] On February 25,
Clark set the Class 5A state tournament single-game scoring record with
42 points in a 75–70 triple-overtime win over [Waukee High
School](Waukee_High_School "wikilink") in the quarterfinals.[26] She
helped Dowling reach the semifinals of the tournament and finish with a
17–8 record.[27] As a junior, Clark led the state in scoring and
averaged 32.6 points, 6.8 rebounds, 3.6 assists and 2.3 steals per
game.[28][29] She was named Iowa [Gatorade Player of the
Year](Gatorade_Player_of_the_Year_awards "wikilink") and repeated as a
Class 5A All-State first-team selection by the IPSWA.[30][31] As a
[senior](Senior_(education) "wikilink"), Clark averaged 33.4 points,
eight rebounds, four assists and 2.7 steals per game,[32] leading the
state in scoring for a second time. Her team finished with a 19–4 record
and reached the Class 5A regional final, where they were upset by [Sioux
City East High School](East_High_School_(Sioux_City,_Iowa) "wikilink").
Clark finished her career with the fourth-most points (2,547) and the
sixth-most three-pointers (283) in Iowa five-on-five history.[33] She
was awarded Iowa Gatorade Player of the Year,[34] *[Des Moines
Register](The_Des_Moines_Register "wikilink")* All-Iowa Athlete of the
Year,[35] and [Iowa Miss Basketball](Iowa_Miss_Basketball "wikilink"),
while making the IPSWA Class 5A All-State first-team.[36] Clark was
selected to compete in the [McDonald's All-American
Game](2020_McDonald's_All-American_Girls_Game "wikilink") and the
[Jordan Brand Classic](Jordan_Brand_Classic "wikilink"), two prestigious
high school all-star games,[37][38] but both games were canceled due to
the [COVID-19
pandemic](COVID-19_pandemic_in_the_United_States "wikilink").[39]

In her first two years at Dowling, Clark was a starter on the school's
varsity soccer team but focused on basketball for her final two
years.[40] In her freshman season, she scored 23 goals and was named to
the Class 3A All-Iowa team by *The Des Moines Register*.[41][42]

### Recruiting

Clark was recruited by [NCAA Division I](NCAA_Division_I "wikilink")
basketball programs before starting high school, receiving her first
letter of interest from [Missouri
State](Missouri_State_Lady_Bears_basketball "wikilink") before seventh
grade.[43][44] By her sophomore season at Dowling Catholic, she was
ranked the number one player in the 2020 high school class by
[ESPN](ESPN "wikilink").[45] At the end of her high school career, Clark
was considered a five-star [recruit](college_recruiting "wikilink") and
the fourth-best player in her class by ESPN.[46] Clark's family had
wanted her to choose [Notre
Dame](Notre_Dame_Fighting_Irish_women's_basketball "wikilink"), and she
made a verbal commitment to the school's then-head coach [Muffet
McGraw](Muffet_McGraw "wikilink"). However, Clark never signed a
[National Letter of Intent](National_Letter_of_Intent "wikilink") with
the school, and soon reconsidered,[47] announcing on November 12, 2019,
that she would commit to play [college
basketball](college_basketball "wikilink") for
[Iowa](Iowa_Hawkeyes_women's_basketball "wikilink") over offers from
[Iowa State](Iowa_State_Cyclones_women's_basketball "wikilink") and
Notre Dame.[48] Clark was drawn to the team's up-tempo style of offense
and head coach [Lisa Bluder](Lisa_Bluder "wikilink")'s development of
point guards. She also expected to immediately have a key role on the
team with the departure of [Kathleen Doyle](Kathleen_Doyle "wikilink"),
the reigning [Big Ten Player of the
Year](Big_Ten_Conference_Women's_Basketball_Player_of_the_Year "wikilink").[49]

## College career

### Freshman season

Clark entered her freshman season as Iowa's starting [point
guard](point_guard "wikilink").[50] On November 25, 2020, she made her
collegiate debut, recording 27 points, eight rebounds, and four assists
in a 96–81 win over [Northern
Iowa](Northern_Iowa_Panthers_women's_basketball "wikilink").[51] In her
second game, on December 2, Clark posted her first
[double-double](double-double "wikilink") with 30 points and 13 assists
in a 103–97 victory over
[Drake](Drake_Bulldogs_women's_basketball "wikilink").[52] On December
22, in a 92–65 victory over [Western
Illinois](Western_Illinois_Leathernecks_women's_basketball "wikilink"),
she registered the first
[triple-double](double-double#Triple-double "wikilink") by an Iowa
player since [Samantha Logic](Samantha_Logic "wikilink") did so in 2015.
Despite shooting 3-of-15 from the field, Clark had 13 points, 13
rebounds and 10 assists during the game.[53] On January 6, 2021, she
recorded 37 points, 11 rebounds and four assists in a 92–79 win against
[Minnesota](Minnesota_Golden_Gophers_women's_basketball "wikilink").[54]
Clark posted a season-high 39 points, 10 rebounds and seven assists in
an 88–81 win over
[Nebraska](Nebraska_Cornhuskers_women's_basketball "wikilink") on
February 11,[55] breaking the single-game scoring record for [Pinnacle
Bank Arena](Pinnacle_Bank_Arena "wikilink"), the home venue of
Nebraska.[56] On February 28, she scored 18 points and had a season-high
14 assists in an 84–70 win over
[Wisconsin](Wisconsin_Badgers_women's_basketball "wikilink").[57] At the
end of the regular season, Clark was a unanimous [Big Ten Freshman of
the
Year](Big_Ten_Conference_Women's_Basketball_Freshman_of_the_Year "wikilink")
and first-team All-Big Ten selection. She was a 13-time Big Ten Freshman
of the Week, setting a conference record, and led the Big Ten with five
Player of the Week awards.[58]

Clark helped Iowa achieve a runner-up finish at the [Big Ten
tournament](2021_Big_Ten_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
where she was named to the all-tournament team and recorded 37 assists,
the most in the event's history.[59] In the second round of the [NCAA
tournament](2021_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
she posted 35 points, seven rebounds and six assists in an 86–72 win
over [Kentucky](Kentucky_Wildcats_women's_basketball "wikilink"). She
broke program single-game records for points and three-pointers (6) in
the tournament.[60] Iowa reached the Sweet 16, where Clark scored 21
points in a 92–72 loss to first-seeded
[UConn](UConn_Huskies_women's_basketball "wikilink").[61] She was named
a first-team
[All-American](NCAA_Women's_Basketball_All-Americans "wikilink") by the
[United States Basketball Writers
Association](United_States_Basketball_Writers_Association "wikilink")
(USBWA), a second-team All-American by the [Associated
Press](Associated_Press "wikilink") (AP) and made the [Women's
Basketball Coaches
Association](Women's_Basketball_Coaches_Association "wikilink") (WBCA)
Coaches' All-America team.[62] Clark became the first freshman to win
the [Dawn Staley Award](Dawn_Staley_Award "wikilink"), which honors the
best Division I [guard](guard_(basketball) "wikilink").[63] She shared
two major Division I freshman of the year awards with [Paige
Bueckers](Paige_Bueckers "wikilink") of
[UConn](UConn_Huskies_women's_basketball "wikilink"): the [Tamika
Catchings Award](USBWA_National_Freshman_of_the_Year "wikilink"),
presented by the USBWA,[64] and the [WBCA Freshman of the
Year](WBCA_Freshman_of_the_Year "wikilink") award.[65] As a freshman,
Clark averaged 26.6 points, 7.1 assists, and 5.9 rebounds per game. She
led the [NCAA Division I](NCAA_Division_I "wikilink") in scoring and
ranked second in assists and three-pointers per game. Her totals in
points, assists, [field goals](Field_goal_(basketball) "wikilink") and
three-pointers also led Division I. She set program freshman records for
points and assists and had the fourth-highest scoring average in Iowa
history.[66]

### Sophomore season

On November 9, 2021, Clark made her sophomore season debut, recording 26
points, eight rebounds and six assists in a 93–50 win over [New
Hampshire](New_Hampshire_Wildcats_women's_basketball "wikilink").[67] On
January 2, 2022, she posted 44 points and eight assists in a 93–56 win
over [Evansville](Evansville_Purple_Aces_women's_basketball "wikilink").
Clark broke the [Carver–Hawkeye Arena](Carver–Hawkeye_Arena "wikilink")
women's single-game scoring record and surpassed [Kelsey
Mitchell](Kelsey_Mitchell_(basketball) "wikilink") of [Ohio
State](Ohio_State_Buckeyes_women's_basketball "wikilink") as the fastest
Big Ten player to reach 1,000 career points.[68] On January 16, 2022,
she recorded her fourth career triple-double, with 31 points, 10
rebounds and 10 assists in a 93–83 victory over
[Nebraska](Nebraska_Cornhuskers_women's_basketball "wikilink").[69] In
her next game, four days later, Clark posted 35 points, 13 rebounds and
11 assists in a 105–49 win over Minnesota. She became the first Division
I men's or women's player to record consecutive triple-doubles with at
least 30 points and the first women's player in Big Ten history with
consecutive triple-doubles.[70] On January 25, Clark had 18 assists,
which set program and tied conference single-game records, in addition
to 20 points and seven rebounds in a 107–79 win against [Penn
State](Penn_State_Lady_Lions_basketball "wikilink").[71][72] On January
31, she recorded 43 points, seven assists and four rebounds in a 92–88
loss to Ohio State.[73] On February 6, Clark scored a season-high 46
points, including 25 in the fourth quarter, and had 10 assists in a
98–90 loss to
[Michigan](Michigan_Wolverines_women's_basketball "wikilink").[74] She
set the women's single-game scoring record for [Crisler
Center](Crisler_Center "wikilink"), the home arena of Michigan.[75]
After leading Iowa to a share of the Big Ten regular season title, she
was unanimously named [Big Ten Player of the
Year](Big_Ten_Conference_Women's_Basketball_Player_of_the_Year "wikilink")
and first-team All-Big Ten by the league's coaches and media.[76][77]

On March 5, 2022, in the semifinals of the [Big Ten
tournament](2022_Big_Ten_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
Clark recorded 41 points and nine rebounds in an 83–66 win over
Nebraska.[78] She led Iowa to the title and was named the tournament's
most outstanding player (MOP).[79] Her team was upset by 10th-seeded
[Creighton](Creighton_Bluejays_women's_basketball "wikilink") in the
second round of the [NCAA
tournament](2022_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
where Clark was held to a season-low 15 points and 11 assists, shooting
4-of-19 from the field, in a 64–62 loss.[80] She was a unanimous
first-team All-American: she earned first-team All-American honors from
the AP and the USBWA, and was a WBCA Coaches' All-America Team
selection.[81] Clark became the first back-to-back recipient of the Dawn
Staley Award and won the [Nancy Lieberman
Award](Nancy_Lieberman_Award "wikilink") as the top Division I point
guard.[82] As a sophomore, she averaged 27 points, eight rebounds and
eight assists per game. Clark was the first women's player to lead
Division I in points and assists per game in a single season. She also
led Division I in total points, [free throws](free_throw "wikilink") and
triple-doubles.[83]

### Junior season

Entering her junior season, Clark was a unanimous selection for the AP
preseason All-America team and was named Big Ten preseason player of the
year by the league's coaches and media.[84][85] On November 18, 2022,
she suffered an ankle injury with 3.8 seconds left in an 84–83 loss to
[Kansas State](Kansas_State_Wildcats_women's_basketball "wikilink"),
where she recorded 27 points, 10 rebounds and seven assists.[86] Clark
played in Iowa's next game against
[Belmont](Belmont_Bruins_women's_basketball "wikilink") on November 20,
scoring 33 points in a 73–62 victory.[87] On December 1, she scored a
season-high 45 points in a 94–81 loss to [NC
State](NC_State_Wolfpack_women's_basketball "wikilink").[88] Three days
later, Clark posted her seventh career triple-double, with 22 points, 10
rebounds and 10 assists in a 102–71 win over
[Wisconsin](Wisconsin_Badgers_women's_basketball "wikilink"). She
surpassed Samantha Logic as the Big Ten career leader in
triple-doubles.[89] On December 21, in her 75th game, Clark tied [Elena
Delle Donne](Elena_Delle_Donne "wikilink") of
[Delaware](Delaware_Fightin'_Blue_Hens_women's_basketball "wikilink") as
the fastest Division I women's player to reach 2,000 career points since
the 1999–2000 season, scoring 20 points in a 92–54 win over
[Dartmouth](Dartmouth_Big_Green_women's_basketball "wikilink").[90] On
January 23, 2023, Clark recorded 28 points, 15 assists and 10 rebounds
in an 83–72 win over [AP](AP_poll "wikilink") No. 2 Ohio State, who were
previously unbeaten.[91] On February 2, she had 42 points, eight assists
and seven rebounds in a 96–82 victory over
[Maryland](Maryland_Terrapins_women's_basketball "wikilink").[92] On
February 26, Clark recorded 34 points, nine rebounds and nine assists,
making a game-winning three-pointer at the buzzer, in an 86–85 win
against AP No. 2 Indiana.[93] At the end of the regular season, she
repeated as Big Ten Player of the Year in a unanimous vote and was named
first-team All-Big Ten by the league's coaches and media.[94][95]

Clark led Iowa to its second consecutive [Big Ten
tournament](2023_Big_Ten_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink")
championship, where she earned MOP honors. In the title game, she
recorded 30 points, 17 assists and 10 rebounds in a 105–72 win over Ohio
State, the first triple-double in the final of the tournament. Clark
moved to second in Division I women's history behind [Sabrina
Ionescu](Sabrina_Ionescu "wikilink") of
[Oregon](Oregon_Ducks_women's_basketball "wikilink") with her 10th
career triple-double.[96] In the Elite Eight of the [NCAA
tournament](2023_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
she recorded 41 points, 12 assists and 10 rebounds in a 97–83 win over
[Louisville](Louisville_Cardinals_women's_basketball "wikilink"). She
became the first player in men's or women's tournament history to record
a 30 or 40-point triple-double.[97] During the game, Clark became the
first Division I player to record at least 900 points and 300 assists in
a single season.[98] For her performance, Clark was named the Seattle 4
Regional MOP as Iowa reached its first Final Four since
[1993](1992–93_Iowa_Hawkeyes_women's_basketball_team "wikilink"). In the
Final Four, she posted 41 points, eight assists, and six rebounds in a
77–73 upset win over undefeated defending champion [South
Carolina](South_Carolina_Gamecocks_women's_basketball "wikilink"),
ending their 42-game winning streak.[99][100] She broke the single-game
scoring record for the women's tournament semifinals and became the
first player in tournament history with consecutive 40-point games.[101]
Clark also surpassed the program and Big Ten single-season scoring
records held by [Megan Gustafson](Megan_Gustafson "wikilink").[102] With
the win, Iowa advanced to their first women's basketball championship
game in program history.[103] Though Clark had 30 points and eight
assists against
[LSU](2022–23_LSU_Tigers_women's_basketball_team "wikilink") in the
[national
championship](2023_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_championship_game "wikilink"),
Iowa lost the game, 102–85. She made eight three-pointers, the most by a
men's or women's player in the title game.[104][105] Near the end of the
game, LSU star [Angel Reese](Angel_Reese "wikilink") followed Clark,
making a "[you can't see me](John_Cena#In_popular_culture "wikilink")"
gesture implying that Clark could not keep up with her, and also
pointing to her ring finger in reference to LSU's imminent [championship
ring](championship_ring "wikilink").[106] Reese received considerable
criticism for the gestures, which many in the media viewed as
[unsportsmanlike](Sportsmanship "wikilink"). However, many also defended
Reese's gestures and [trash talk](trash_talk "wikilink"), highlighting a
double standard, as Clark had made the same gesture at a previous game
and did not face similar criticism.[107][108] Clark herself defended
Reese over criticism about the gesture.[109][110] In coverage of this
incident, journalists and the public have commented on the roles of race
and gender in perceptions of sportsmanship.[111][112] With 191 points in
the tournament, Clark broke the men's and women's scoring records for a
single NCAA tournament. Her 60 assists were the most by a player in
women's tournament history.[113]

Clark won all major national player of the year awards: [AP Player of
the
Year](Associated_Press_Women's_College_Basketball_Player_of_the_Year "wikilink"),
the [Honda Sports Award](Honda_Sports_Award "wikilink"), the [John R.
Wooden Award](John_R._Wooden_Award "wikilink"), [Naismith College Player
of the Year](Naismith_College_Player_of_the_Year "wikilink"), [USBWA
National Player of the
Year](USBWA_Women's_National_Player_of_the_Year "wikilink") and the
[Wade Trophy](Wade_Trophy "wikilink"). She was the first unanimous
national player of the year in Big Ten history.[114] Clark won the Nancy
Lieberman Award for a second time and became the first three-time winner
of the Dawn Staley Award.[115][116] She was a unanimous first-team
All-American for a second straight season, earning first-team
recognition from the AP and USBWA and making the WBCA Coaches'
All-America Team.[117][118][119] As a junior, Clark averaged 27.8
points, 8.6 assists and 7.1 rebounds per game, leading Division I in
assists and ranking second in scoring. She set Big Ten single-season
records in points, assists, three-pointers and free throws, and tied her
own conference record with five triple-doubles.[120] She had the
fourth-most points and assists and the third-most three-pointers in a
season in Division I history.[121] Following the season, Clark won the
[Best Female College Athlete ESPY
Award](Best_Female_College_Athlete_ESPY_Award "wikilink") and the [Honda
Cup](Honda-Broderick_Cup "wikilink"), both honoring the top women's
college athlete,[122][123] and the [James E. Sullivan
Award](James_E._Sullivan_Award "wikilink"), presented annually by the
AAU to the top college or Olympic athlete in the United States.[124] She
was selected as the [Big Ten Female Athlete of the
Year](Big_Ten_Athlete_of_the_Year "wikilink").[125]

### Senior season

Entering her senior season, Clark was named preseason Big Ten Player of
the Year and earned unanimous AP preseason All-American
honors.[126][127] On October 15, 2023, she played in [Crossover at
Kinnick](Crossover_at_Kinnick "wikilink"), a preseason [exhibition
game](exhibition_game "wikilink") against
[DePaul](2023–24_DePaul_Blue_Demons_women's_basketball_team "wikilink")
at [Kinnick Stadium](Kinnick_Stadium "wikilink"), and had a
triple-double of 34 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists in a 94–72 win.
The game had an attendance of 55,646, which set the women's basketball
record.[128][129] In her second regular season game, on November 9,
Clark posted 44 points, eight rebounds and six assists in an 80–76 win
over AP No. 8 [Virginia
Tech](Virginia_Tech_Hokies_women's_basketball "wikilink").[130] In
Iowa's third game, a 94–53 blowout of Northern Iowa on November 12,
Clark recorded her 12th career triple-double, with 24 points, 11 assists
and 10 rebounds. She became Iowa's all-time leading scorer, passing
Megan Gustafson, and became only the second player in Division I history
with a triple-double in four different seasons, joining Ionescu.[131]
One week later, she recorded 35 points, 10 assists, six rebounds and
seven steals in a 113–90 win over Drake, passing [Kelsey
Plum](Kelsey_Plum "wikilink") of
[Washington](Washington_Huskies_women's_basketball "wikilink") for the
most 30-point games in women's Division I history.[132] 

On December 6,
2023, Clark became the 15th Division I player to reach 3,000 career
points and was the second-fastest to reach the mark, posting 35 points,
nine rebounds and five assists in a 67–58 victory over Iowa State.[133]
On December 16, Clark scored 38 points and made nine three-pointers in a
104–75 win over [Cleveland
State](Cleveland_State_Vikings_women's_basketball "wikilink").[134]
Three days later, she shared *[Sporting
News](The_Sporting_News "wikilink")* [Athlete of the
Year](The_Sporting_News#Athlete_of_the_Year "wikilink") honors with
Angel Reese.[135] Later that week, Clark was announced as the runner-up
to gymnast [Simone Biles](Simone_Biles "wikilink") for the [AP Female
Athlete of the Year](Associated_Press_Athlete_of_the_Year "wikilink")
award.[136] On December 21, in Iowa's final non-conference game, she
recorded a triple-double of 35 points, 17 rebounds, and 10 assists in
the Hawkeyes' 98–69 win over [Loyola
Chicago](Loyola_Ramblers_women's_basketball "wikilink").[137] In her
next game, on December 30, Clark posted 35 points and 10 assists in a
94–71 victory against Minnesota, surpassing [Samantha
Prahalis](Samantha_Prahalis "wikilink") of Ohio State to become the Big
Ten's all-time leader in assists. During that game, she also eclipsed
Samantha Logic for the program record in the same category.[138] On
January 2, 2024, Clark scored 40 points and made a long, game-winning
three-pointer as time expired in a 76–73 win over [Michigan
State](Michigan_State_Spartans_women's_basketball "wikilink").[139]
Three days later, she posted 29 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists in a
103–69 win over
[Rutgers](Rutgers_Scarlet_Knights_women's_basketball "wikilink").[140]
On January 8, Clark was named Big Ten Player of the Week for the 24th
time in her career, breaking the conference record held by
Gustafson.[141] In her following game, she registered her second
consecutive triple-double, with 26 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists in
a 96–71 victory against
[Purdue](Purdue_Boilermakers_women's_basketball "wikilink").[142] On
January 21, Clark recorded 45 points and seven assists in a 100–92
overtime loss to AP No. 18 Ohio State. After the game, as Ohio State
fans were [rushing the court](Pitch_invasion "wikilink"), she was
knocked down in a collision with a fan but did not suffer an injury,
despite initially appearing to be in pain.[143] 

On January 31, 2024, Clark posted 35 points and 10 assists in a 110–74
win over
[Northwestern](2023–24_Northwestern_Wildcats_women's_basketball_team "wikilink"),
breaking the Big Ten all-time scoring record held by Kelsey Mitchell of
Ohio State.[144] In February, [Fox](Fox_Broadcasting_Company "wikilink")
began devoting a camera, called the "Caitlin Cam," to record Clark
during its broadcasts of Iowa games and to stream on
[TikTok](TikTok "wikilink").[145] She became the sixth Division I
women's player with 1,000 career assists during the Hawkeyes' 82–79 loss
at
[Nebraska](2023–24_Nebraska_Cornhuskers_women's_basketball_team "wikilink")
on February 11, where she tallied 31 points, 10 assists and eight
rebounds.[146] On February 15, Clark became the [NCAA Division I women's
career scoring
leader](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_career_scoring_leaders "wikilink"),
surpassing Kelsey Plum, during a 106–89 win over Michigan.[147] She
finished the game with a career-high 49 points, 13 assists and five
rebounds, eclipsing Gustafson for the program single-game scoring
record.[148] Between her points and assists, Clark was responsible for
79 of her team's points, the most by any Division I women's player in at
least 25 seasons.[149] On February 28, Clark passed [Lynette
Woodard](Lynette_Woodard "wikilink"), who played for
[Kansas](Kansas_Jayhawks_women's_basketball "wikilink") in the era when
the [Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for
Women](Association_of_Intercollegiate_Athletics_for_Women "wikilink")
governed women's college sports, to become the all-time leader in points
among major women's college players.[150] During the game, she posted
her second straight triple-double, with 33 points, 12 assists and 10
rebounds, leading the Hawkeyes to a 108–60 win over Minnesota. She also
set the Big Ten career record for three-pointers, surpassing Kelsey
Mitchell, and the NCAA single-season record in the same category,
previously held by Taylor Pierce of
[Idaho](Idaho_Vandals_women's_basketball "wikilink").[151][152] In her
final regular season game, on March 3, Clark became the NCAA Division I
all-time leading scorer among men's or women's players, eclipsing [Pete
Maravich](Pete_Maravich "wikilink"), who had set the men's scoring
record in three seasons with
[LSU](LSU_Tigers_men's_basketball "wikilink").[153] She tallied 35
points, nine assists and six rebounds in a 93–83 win over AP No. 2 Ohio
State.[154] She finished the regular season as the unanimous Big Ten
Player of the Year and earned first-team All-Big Ten honors from the
league's coaches and media.[155] 

During the Hawkeyes' quarterfinal win over [Penn
State](2023–24_Penn_State_Lady_Lions_basketball_team "wikilink") at the
[2024 Big Ten
tournament](2024_Big_Ten_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
Clark surpassed [Stephen Curry](Stephen_Curry "wikilink") of
[Davidson](Davidson_Wildcats_men's_basketball "wikilink") and [Darius
McGhee](Darius_McGhee "wikilink") of
[Liberty](Liberty_Flames_basketball "wikilink") for the most
three-pointers in a single season by any Division I player regardless of
gender.[156] In a semifinal win over Michigan, she became the first
Division I women's player to score at least 1,000 points in two
different seasons and passed Mitchell as the career leading scorer in
the [Big Ten
tournament](Big_Ten_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink").[157]
Clark led Iowa to its third straight Big Ten tournament title and was
named MOP after recording 34 points, 12 assists and seven rebounds in a
94–89 overtime win over Nebraska in the final.[158] In the second round
of the [NCAA
tournament](2024_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink"),
Clark scored 32 points and surpassed Kelsey Plum for the most points in
a single season in Division I women's history, leading Iowa to a 64–54
win over [West
Virginia](2023–24_West_Virginia_Mountaineers_women's_basketball_team "wikilink").[159]
The Elite Eight saw a rematch of the 2023 national championship game
against [LSU](2023–24_LSU_Tigers_women's_basketball_team "wikilink"),
where Clark had 41 points, 12 assists and seven rebounds in a 94–87
victory, leading the Hawkeyes to their second straight Final Four and a
school-record 33 wins and being named Albany 2 Regional MOP. Her nine
three-pointers tied the most by a player in an NCAA tournament game. She
surpassed Taylor Robertson's record of 537, set in five seasons at
[Oklahoma](Oklahoma_Sooners_women's_basketball "wikilink"), to become
the all-time Division I leader in three-pointers. Clark also broke NCAA
tournament career marks in assists and three-pointers, held by [Temeka
Johnson](Temeka_Johnson "wikilink") of LSU and [Diana
Taurasi](Diana_Taurasi "wikilink") of UConn, respectively.[160] In the
Final Four, she posted 21 points, nine rebounds and seven assists in a
71–69 win over [UConn](UConn_Huskies_women's_basketball "wikilink"), as
Iowa reached the [national championship
game](2024_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_championship_game "wikilink")
for a second consecutive season.[161] Clark had 30 points, eight
rebounds and five assists in an 87–75 loss to South Carolina, the number
one overall seed, in the title game. She scored 18 points in the first
quarter, the most by a player in a single period in championship game
history.[162] She also surpassed [Chamique
Holdsclaw](Chamique_Holdsclaw "wikilink") of
[Tennessee](Tennessee_Lady_Volunteers_basketball "wikilink") for the
NCAA tournament career scoring record.[163]

Clark was named national player of the year for her second straight
season, receiving AP Player of the Year, the Honda Sports Award, the
John R. Wooden Award, Naismith College Player of the Year, USBWA
National Player of the Year and the Wade Trophy. For a third time, she
won the Nancy Lieberman Award as the top Division I point guard and was
named a unanimous first-team All-American. In her senior season, Clark
averaged 31.6 points, 8.9 assists and 7.4 rebounds per game, leading
Division I in scoring and assists.[164] She finished with the highest
career scoring average (28.42) in Division I history, passing [Patricia
Hoskins](Patricia_Hoskins "wikilink") of [Mississippi Valley
State](Mississippi_Valley_State_Devilettes_basketball "wikilink").[165]
Clark left Iowa with the most career points (3,951) and three-pointers
(548), the second-most triple-doubles (17) and the third-most assists
(1,144) in Division I history.[166][167] Following the season, it was
announced that Iowa would [retire](Retired_number "wikilink") her jersey
number 22, making her the third player in program history to receive the
honor.[168]

On February 29, 2024, Clark announced that she would declare for the
[2024 WNBA draft](2024_WNBA_draft "wikilink"), forgoing her fifth season
of eligibility, which was granted to all players during the [2020–21
season](2020–21_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_season "wikilink")
due to the [COVID-19
pandemic](COVID-19_pandemic_in_the_United_States "wikilink").[169] She
was projected to be the [first overall
pick](List_of_first_overall_WNBA_draft_picks "wikilink") in the [2024
WNBA draft](2024_WNBA_draft "wikilink") by many publications, including
[ESPN](ESPN "wikilink"), *[USA Today](USA_Today "wikilink")* and [CBS
Sports](CBS_Sports "wikilink").[170][171][172]

## Professional career

On April 15, 2024, Clark was selected as the [first overall
pick](List_of_first_overall_WNBA_draft_picks "wikilink") of the [2024
WNBA draft](2024_WNBA_draft "wikilink") by the [Indiana
Fever](Indiana_Fever "wikilink").[173] A few weeks later, on April 27,
2024, the Fever signed Clark to their rookie scale contract.[174]

## National team career

### Junior national team

Clark represented the [United
States](United_States_women's_national_under-17_basketball_team "wikilink")
at the [2017 FIBA Under-16 Women's Americas
Championship](2017_FIBA_Under-16_Women's_Americas_Championship "wikilink")
in [Buenos Aires, Argentina](Buenos_Aires "wikilink"). She came off the
bench and averaged 8.8 points per game, helping her team achieve a 5–0
record and win the gold medal.[175] Clark played at the [2019 FIBA
Under-19 Women's Basketball World
Cup](2019_FIBA_Under-19_Women's_Basketball_World_Cup "wikilink") in
[Bangkok, Thailand](Bangkok "wikilink"). In seven games, she averaged
5.3 points per game and won another gold medal, as her team finished
with a 7–0 record.[176] Clark competed at the [2021 FIBA Under-19
Women's Basketball World
Cup](2021_FIBA_Under-19_Women's_Basketball_World_Cup "wikilink") in
[Debrecen, Hungary](Debrecen "wikilink") and led the United States to
the gold medal. She averaged a team-high 14.3 points, 5.6 assists, and
5.3 rebounds per game, was named [Most Valuable
Player](FIBA_Under-19_Women's_Basketball_World_Cup_Most_Valuable_Player "wikilink")
and made the [All-Tournament
Team](FIBA_Under-19_Women's_Basketball_World_Cup_All-Tournament_Team "wikilink").[177]

### Senior national team

Clark was one of 14 players and the only college player to receive a
training camp invitation from the [United States national
team](United_States_women's_national_basketball_team "wikilink") for the
[2024 Summer
Olympics](Basketball_at_the_2024_Summer_Olympics_–_Women's_tournament "wikilink").[178]

## Player profile

Listed at ,[179] Clark plays [point guard](point_guard "wikilink"), and
writers have noted her great size for her position.[180][181] She is
praised for her versatility, particularly on offense, with *[The
Washington Post](The_Washington_Post "wikilink")* columnist Jerry Brewer
stating that no player in the men's or women's game "checks every
offensive box" as distinctly as her.[182] Clark has the ability to score
in the [paint](Key_(basketball) "wikilink"), in mid-range and from
three-point range.[183] Her shooting range has been lauded by analysts;
she often makes shots from well behind the three-point line and with a
high degree of difficulty.[184] Her shooting has often drawn comparisons
to [National Basketball
Association](National_Basketball_Association "wikilink") (NBA) player
[Stephen Curry](Stephen_Curry "wikilink").[185][186] Analysts have also
praised Clark's passing ability, which *[The
Athletic](The_Athletic "wikilink")* writer Sabreena Merchant described
as being "equally audacious" as her shooting. She can pass ahead in
transition and find her teammates through defensive traffic.[187] Her
combination of scoring and passing skills helps her excel in the [pick
and roll](pick_and_roll "wikilink").[188] Writers have likened Clark's
talent and personality to [Diana
Taurasi](Diana_Taurasi "wikilink").[189][190] Iowa head coach Lisa
Bluder compared her to [Sue Bird](Sue_Bird "wikilink") and Sabrina
Ionescu.[191] Clark has modeled parts of her game after [Maya
Moore](Maya_Moore "wikilink"), [LeBron James](LeBron_James "wikilink"),
[Kevin Durant](Kevin_Durant "wikilink") and [Pete
Maravich](Pete_Maravich "wikilink").[192]

## Legacy

Widely considered a generational talent,[193] Clark is described as one
of the greatest women's college basketball players of all time by many
publications.[194][195][196][197] ESPN analyst [Rebecca
Lobo](Rebecca_Lobo "wikilink") called her the best offensive women's
college player since [Diana Taurasi](Diana_Taurasi "wikilink").[198] In
part due to her unprecedented shooting range and proficiency among
female players, Clark has been labeled a transformative player in
[women's basketball](women's_basketball "wikilink").[199] Her impact on
the women's game is likened to that of Stephen Curry on the men's
game.[200] *[USA Today](USA_Today "wikilink")* stated that she, like
Curry, has "redefined what a good shot is in basketball."[201] *[The
Wall Street Journal](The_Wall_Street_Journal "wikilink")* columnist
Jason Gay wrote: "Clark is far from the first great shooter in women's
basketball, but she's the one who is changing the dimensionality of the
game, because of the distance she can shoot from and how well she can
pass."[202]

Clark was credited with popularizing women's basketball during her
college career, a phenomenon known as the "Caitlin Clark effect."[203]
Publications attributed increases in attendance and television
viewership for the sport to Clark.[204][205] [Richard
Deitsch](Richard_Deitsch "wikilink") of *[The
Athletic](The_Athletic "wikilink")* noted that Clark attracted a wider
audience to the [2023 NCAA
tournament](2023_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink")
because of her long-range shooting, confident playing style and [Middle
American](Middle_America_(United_States) "wikilink") appeal. She helped
the [national championship
game](2023_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_championship_game "wikilink")
become the most-viewed women's college basketball game in history (9.9
million).[206] During her senior season, her team sold out all of its
home games for the first time in program history and set the women's
basketball attendance record (55,646) at a [preseason exhibition
game](Crossover_at_Kinnick "wikilink").[207][208] Each team hosting Iowa
during the regular season set an attendance record, with an average
attendance increase of 150%, and the [2024 Big Ten
tournament](2024_Big_Ten_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink") sold
out for the first time.[209][210]

During Clark's final season at Iowa, regular season games featuring her
became the most-viewed women's basketball games of all time on six
different TV networks—the [Big Ten Network](Big_Ten_Network "wikilink"),
[ABC](ESPN_on_ABC "wikilink"),
[Fox](Fox_Sports_(United_States) "wikilink"),
[FS1](Fox_Sports_1 "wikilink"), [NBC](NBC_Sports "wikilink"), and
[Peacock](Peacock_(streaming_service) "wikilink").[211] Her last regular
season game, in which she surpassed Maravich's Division I career scoring
record, was the most-watched regular season women's basketball game
since 1999, as well as the second-most watched college basketball game
of the season (including men's games).[212] At the 2024 NCAA tournament,
Clark's final three games each broke the women's college basketball
viewership record, culminating with 18.9 million viewers for the
national championship game. It was the most-viewed basketball game at
any level since 2019 and the first women's NCAA tournament final to draw
more viewers than the men's final.[213][214]

## Off the court

### Personal life

Clark's father, Brent Clark, is a sales executive at Concentric
International and played basketball and [baseball](baseball "wikilink")
at [Simpson College](Simpson_College "wikilink").[215][216] Her mother,
Anne Nizzi-Clark, who is of Italian descent, is a former marketing
executive and the daughter of former Dowling Catholic High School
football coach Bob Nizzi.[217] She has an older brother, Blake, who
played [college football](college_football "wikilink") for [Iowa
State](Iowa_State_Cyclones_football "wikilink"), and a younger brother,
Colin.[218] Her cousin, Audrey Faber, played college basketball for
[Creighton](Creighton_Bluejays_women's_basketball "wikilink").[219] Two
of Clark's uncles are former college athletes: Tom Faber played
basketball for [Drake](Drake_Bulldogs_men's_basketball "wikilink") and
[Utica](Utica_Pioneers "wikilink"), and Mike Nizzi played football for
[Nebraska–Omaha](Nebraska–Omaha_Mavericks_football "wikilink").[220] She
is in a relationship with Connor McCaffery, who played basketball and
baseball for Iowa and is the son of Hawkeyes men's basketball head coach
[Fran McCaffery](Fran_McCaffery "wikilink").[221][222]

Clark [majors](academic_major "wikilink") in
[marketing](marketing "wikilink") at the [University of
Iowa](University_of_Iowa "wikilink").[223] In her sophomore year, she
was named a first-team [Division I](NCAA_Division_I "wikilink") Academic
All-American by the College Sports Information Directors of America,
since renamed [College Sports
Communicators](College_Sports_Communicators "wikilink") (CSC).[224] As a
junior, Clark was honored by the CSC as the 2023 Division I [Women's
Basketball Academic All-American of the
Year](List_of_Women's_Basketball_Academic_All-America_Team_Members_of_the_Year "wikilink")
before winning the same award for all Division I sports.[225][226] At
the end of her senior year, Clark again was named the CSC's Division I
Women's Basketball Academic All-American of the Year, completing her
college career with a 3.64 GPA.[227]

Clark is an avid golfer, having played the sport since her childhood. In
July 2023, she played in the [John Deere
Classic](John_Deere_Classic "wikilink") [Pro-Am](Pro–am "wikilink") at
[TPC Deere Run](TPC_Deere_Run "wikilink") alongside professional golfers
[Zach Johnson](Zach_Johnson "wikilink") and [Ludvig
Åberg](Ludvig_Åberg "wikilink").[228][229]

Clark is a practicing [Catholic](Catholic_Church "wikilink").[230] She
is a parishioner at St. Francis of Assisi Catholic Church in Des
Moines.[231][232] While in high school at Dowling, she attributed the
school's "special culture" to its emphasis on prayer and the ability to
"live our faith every day."[233][234]

### Business interests

Clark is represented by Excel Sports Management.[235] She was estimated
to be one of the highest-earning college athletes from [name, image, and
likeness](Student_athlete_compensation "wikilink") (NIL) deals. By the
end of her career at Iowa, college sports website On3 estimated her NIL
valuation as $3.4 million, the most among women's college basketball
players and the fourth-most among college athletes.[236][237][238] On
August 18, 2021, she signed her first NIL deal with The Vinyl Studio, a
company based in [West Des Moines,
Iowa](West_Des_Moines,_Iowa "wikilink").[239] Clark signed with
[Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink") on October 10, 2022; she has often worn
shoes from the company's [Kobe Bryant](Kobe_Bryant "wikilink") signature
shoe line.[240][241] On October 10, 2023, she became a spokesperson for
[State Farm](State_Farm "wikilink") and was the first college athlete to
sign with the company.[242] That December, Clark added
[Gatorade](Gatorade "wikilink") to her list of endorsements, joining
[Paige Bueckers](Paige_Bueckers "wikilink") as the only women's
basketball players to sign with the company.[243] As part of the deal,
Gatorade donated $22,000, in reference to her number 22 jersey, to the
Caitlin Clark Foundation, which aims to benefit youth and their
communities through education, nutrition and sport.[244] She is
partnered with the Iowa-based supermarket chain
[Hy-Vee](Hy-Vee "wikilink"), which launched a cereal called "Caitlin's
Crunch Time" at select stores in January 2024, with proceeds going to
Clark's foundation,[245] and has paid for private security to accompany
her at some public events.[246] She has also signed NIL deals with
[Bose](Bose_Corporation "wikilink"), [Buick](Buick "wikilink"), [Goldman
Sachs](Goldman_Sachs "wikilink"), [H&R Block](H&R_Block "wikilink") and
[Topps](Topps "wikilink"), among other companies.[247]

### In popular culture

During their years together playing at Iowa (2020–2023), Clark and
teammate, [Monika Czinano](Monika_Czinano "wikilink"), were given the
collective name "[The Law Firm](The_Law_Firm_(basketball) "wikilink")"
by analyst [Christy
Winters-Scott](Christy_Winters-Scott "wikilink").[248][249]

On June 18, 2022, Clark threw out the [first
pitch](ceremonial_first_pitch "wikilink") for the [Iowa
Cubs](Iowa_Cubs "wikilink"), the
[Triple-A](Triple-A_(baseball) "wikilink") affiliate of the [Chicago
Cubs](Chicago_Cubs "wikilink"), of whom she has been a lifelong fan. She
threw the first pitch for the Chicago Cubs on August 23 that same year.
In the following year, the Iowa Cubs honored Clark with her own
[bobblehead](bobblehead "wikilink") night and the first pitch.[250] She
has also been a lifelong fan of the [Kansas City
Chiefs](Kansas_City_Chiefs "wikilink") and appeared on the
[ManningCast](Manningcast "wikilink") for a *[Monday Night
Football](Monday_Night_Football "wikilink")* game featuring the Chiefs
on November 20, 2023, becoming the first college athlete to appear on
the broadcast.[251]

In August 2023, the [Iowa State Fair](Iowa_State_Fair "wikilink")
unveiled a life-size [butter
sculpture](Butter_sculptures_at_the_Iowa_State_Fair "wikilink") of
Clark. She was one of three Iowa college athletes, alongside former
[football](American_football "wikilink") players [Kurt
Warner](Kurt_Warner "wikilink") ([Northern
Iowa](Northern_Iowa_Panthers_football "wikilink")) and [Jack
Trice](Jack_Trice "wikilink") ([Iowa
State](Iowa_State_Cyclones_football "wikilink")), whose sculptures were
displayed.[252] On February 22, 2024, the [Iowa House of
Representatives](Iowa_House_of_Representatives "wikilink") unanimously
passed a [resolution](Resolution_(law) "wikilink") declaring February 22
as "Caitlin Clark Day" in the state, in reference to her jersey
number.[253] On March 5, members of Iowa's federal delegation, including
senators [Joni Ernst](Joni_Ernst "wikilink") and [Chuck
Grassley](Chuck_Grassley "wikilink") and representative [Mariannette
Miller-Meeks](Mariannette_Miller-Meeks "wikilink"), introduced a
resolution to recognize Clark for breaking the NCAA Division I scoring
record.[254]

Clark was the subject of media attention ahead of the [Iowa Republican
presidential
caucuses](2024_Iowa_Republican_presidential_caucuses "wikilink") in
January 2024. Before attending the Hawkeyes' home game against
Minnesota, presidential candidate [Nikki Haley](Nikki_Haley "wikilink")
praised Clark in front of a local crowd but mistakenly called her
"Caitlin Collins". Writers speculated that Haley confused Clark's name
with [CNN](CNN "wikilink") anchor [Kaitlan
Collins](Kaitlan_Collins "wikilink"), who joked about the incident on
[X](Twitter "wikilink").[255][256] In the following week, Collins hosted
an interview in Iowa with presidential candidate [Ron
DeSantis](Ron_DeSantis "wikilink"), who handed her a Clark jersey in
reference to the incident.[257]

On January 25, 2024, an autographed 2022 [trading
card](trading_card "wikilink") featuring Clark sold for $78,000, the
most ever for a women's basketball card. It was the second-most
expensive card of a female athlete, behind tennis player [Serena
Williams](Serena_Williams "wikilink").[258] In February 2024, Clark
became the top-selling college athlete on the online sports merchandise
retailer [Fanatics](Fanatics,_Inc. "wikilink"), surpassing [Colorado
Buffaloes](Colorado_Buffaloes_football "wikilink") quarterback [Shedeur
Sanders](Shedeur_Sanders "wikilink").[259]

In March 2024, [ESPN+](ESPN+ "wikilink") announced their new original
[docuseries](Television_documentary "wikilink"), *Full Court Press,*
executive-produced by Clark, would premiere in May 2024.[260] The series
(from [Peyton Manning](Peyton_Manning "wikilink")’s [Omaha
Productions](Omaha_Productions "wikilink") and Words & Pictures) will
follow Clark, South Carolina's [Kamilla
Cardoso](Kamilla_Cardoso "wikilink"), and UCLA's [Kiki
Rice](Kiki_Rice "wikilink") throughout their [2023-24
season](2023–24_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_season "wikilink")
and
[post-season](2024_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_tournament "wikilink").[261][262]

Clark appeared on the April 13, 2024 episode of *[Saturday Night
Live](Saturday_Night_Live "wikilink")*. As part of a skit during the
*[Weekend Update](Weekend_Update "wikilink")* segment, she criticized
co-anchor [Michael Che](Michael_Che "wikilink")'s past jokes about
women's basketball and wrote new jokes for him to read aloud. She also
paid tribute to former women's basketball stars, including [Dawn
Staley](Dawn_Staley "wikilink") and [Maya
Moore](Maya_Moore "wikilink").[263]

## Filmography

### Television

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Year</p></th>
<th><p>Title</p></th>
<th><p>Role</p></th>
<th class="unsortable"><p>Notes</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>2023</p></td>
<td><p><em><a href="Manningcast"
title="wikilink">ManningCast</a></em></p></td>
<td rowspan="3"><p>Herself</p></td>
<td><p>Episode: <a href="Manningcast#ep27"
title="wikilink">"Philadelphia Eagles at Kansas City
Chiefs"</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td rowspan="2"><p>2024</p></td>
<td><p><em><a href="Saturday_Night_Live" title="wikilink">Saturday Night
Live</a></em></p></td>
<td><p>Episode: <a href="Saturday_Night_Live_(season_49)#ep965"
title="wikilink">"Ryan Gosling"</a><a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><em>Full Court Press</em><a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p></td>
<td><p>4-part <a href="Television_documentary"
title="wikilink">docuseries</a>; also executive producer<a href="#fn3"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


## See also

-   [List of NCAA Division I women's basketball career scoring
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_career_scoring_leaders "wikilink")
-   [List of NCAA Division I women's basketball career 3-point scoring
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_career_3-point_scoring_leaders "wikilink")
-   [List of NCAA Division I women's basketball career assists
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_career_assists_leaders "wikilink")
-   [List of NCAA Division I basketball career triple-doubles
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_basketball_career_triple-doubles_leaders "wikilink")
-   [List of NCAA Division I women's basketball season scoring
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_season_scoring_leaders "wikilink")
-   [List of NCAA Division I women's basketball season 3-point field
    goal
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_season_3-point_field_goal_leaders "wikilink")
-   [List of NCAA Division I women's basketball season assists
    leaders](List_of_NCAA_Division_I_women's_basketball_season_assists_leaders "wikilink")