# Black-capped chickadee
The **black-capped chickadee** (***Poecile atricapillus***) is a small,
nonmigratory, North American [passerine](passerine "wikilink") bird that
lives in deciduous and mixed forests. It is a member of the
[Paridae](Paridae "wikilink") [family](family_(biology) "wikilink"),
also known as tits. It has a distinct black cap on its head, a black bib
underneath, and white cheeks. It has a white belly, buff sides, and grey
wings, back, and tail. The bird is well known for its vocalizations,
including its *fee-bee* call and its *chick-a-dee-dee-dee* call, from
which it derives its name.

The black-capped chickadee is widely distributed throughout North
America, ranging from the northern United States to southern Canada and
all the way up to Alaska and [Yukon](Yukon "wikilink"). It feeds
primarily on insects and seeds, and is known for its ability to
[cache](Hoarding_(animal_behavior) "wikilink") food for use during the
winter. The [hippocampus](hippocampus "wikilink") of the black-capped
chickadee grows during the caching season, which is believed to help it
better remember its cache locations. The black-capped chickadee is a
social bird and forms strict [dominance
hierarchies](Dominance_hierarchy "wikilink") within its flock. During
the winter, these flocks include other bird species. It has the ability
to lower its body temperature during cold winter nights, allowing it to
conserve energy.

Black-capped chickadees build [nests](Bird_nest "wikilink") in tree
cavities, with the nesting season starting in late April and lasting
until late June. They lay on average 6–8 eggs, which hatch after 11–14
days. Juveniles [fledge](fledge "wikilink") 12–16 days after hatching.

The population of black-capped chickadees is thought to be increasing,
and they are considered a species of [least
concern](least_concern "wikilink") by the [International Union for
Conservation of
Nature](International_Union_for_Conservation_of_Nature "wikilink")
(IUCN). It is the state bird of both Massachusetts and Maine in the
United States, and the provincial bird of New Brunswick in Canada.

## Taxonomy

In 1760, French zoologist [Mathurin Jacques
Brisson](Mathurin_Jacques_Brisson "wikilink") included a description of
the black-capped chickadee in his book *Ornithologie* based on a
specimen collected in Canada. He used the French name and the Latin
*Parus Canadensis Atricapillus*.[1] Although Brisson gave it Latin
names, these do not conform to the [binomial
system](binomial_nomenclature "wikilink") and are not recognised by the
[International Commission on Zoological
Nomenclature](International_Commission_on_Zoological_Nomenclature "wikilink").[2]
In 1766, Swedish naturalist [Carl Linnaeus](Carl_Linnaeus "wikilink")
published the [12th edition](12th_edition_of_Systema_Naturae "wikilink")
of his *[Systema Naturae](Systema_Naturae "wikilink")*, which included
240 species that had been previously described by Brisson.[3] One of
these was the black-capped chickadee. Linnaeus included a brief
description, coined the [binomial name](binomial_name "wikilink") *Parus
atricapillus* and cited Brisson's work.[4] The [specific
epithet](Specific_name_(zoology) "wikilink") *atricapillus* is Latin for
"black-haired" from (black) and (hair of the head).[5]

Though originally placed in the genus *[Parus](Parus "wikilink")* with
most other tits, [mtDNA](mtDNA "wikilink") [cytochrome
b](Cytochrome "wikilink") [sequence](DNA_sequence "wikilink") data and
[morphology](Morphology_(biology) "wikilink") suggested that separating
*Poecile* more adequately expressed these birds' relationships.[6] The
genus *Poecile* had been introduced by German naturalist [Johann Jakob
Kaup](Johann_Jakob_Kaup "wikilink") in 1829,[7] and the [American
Ornithologists' Union](American_Ornithological_Society "wikilink") moved
the black-capped chickadee into this genus in 1998.[8] [Molecular
phylogenetic](Molecular_phylogenetic "wikilink") studies have shown that
the black-capped chickadee is [sister](sister_taxon "wikilink") to the
[mountain chickadee](mountain_chickadee "wikilink") (*Poecile
gambeli*).[9][10]

The following cladogram shows the relationships between the various
chickadee species, a subset of genus *Poecile*:[11]

Until the late 1900s, the black-capped chickadee was considered by some
to be conspecific with the [willow tit](willow_tit "wikilink") of
Eurasia and the Carolina chickadee, due to their very similar
appearance.[12] A 1989 study demonstrated that the Willow tit and
black-capped chickadee were different species;[13] however, the
distinction of the Carolina chickadee remained in question until
2005.[14]

### Subspecies

Nine subspecies are currently recognized. They are presented below in
the taxonomic order set by the [International Ornithologists'
Union](International_Ornithologists'_Union "wikilink") (IOC)[15]

-   *Poecile atricapillus turneri*
    <small>([Ridgway](Robert_Ridgway "wikilink"), 1884)</small>: Found
    in southern Alaska and northwest Canada and has the palest colouring
    of all subspecies.[16][17]
-   *Poecile atricapillus occidentalis*
    <small>([Baird](Spencer_Fullerton_Baird "wikilink"), 1858)</small>:
    Ranges from southwest British Columbia to northwest California, and
    is the smallest in size and darkest in colouring of all
    subspecies.[18][19]
-   *Poecile atricapillus fortuitus*
    <small>([Dawson](William_Leon_Dawson "wikilink"), 1909)</small>:
    Ranges from inland southwest Canada to northwest U.S., and is
    notably buffier than other subspecies.[20][21]
-   *Poecile atricapillus septentrionalis*
    <small>([Harris](Edward_Harris_(ornithologist) "wikilink"),
    1846)</small>: Ranges from western and central Canada to southern
    U.S. It is visually similar to *P. a. atricapillus* but has slightly
    longer wings and tail.[22][23]
-   *Poecile atricapillus bartletti*
    <small>([Alrich](John_Warren_Aldrich "wikilink") & Nutt,
    1939)</small>: Lives only in
    [Newfoundland](Newfoundland "wikilink"), Canada, and is the only
    species with different mtDNA, likely due to geographic
    isolation.[24][25] It is larger and darker than *P. a.
    atricapillus*.[26]
-   *Poecile atricapillus atricapillus* <small>(Linnaeus, 1766)</small>:
    [Nominate subspecies](Nominate_subspecies "wikilink"), which ranges
    from eastern and central Canada to northeastern U.S.[27]
-   *Poecile atricapillus garrinus*
    <small>([Behle](William_H._Behle "wikilink"), 1951)</small>: Lives
    in western central U.S.[28] It has a brown back and buff rump.[29]
-   *Poecile atricapillus nevadensis* <small>(Linsdale, 1938)</small>:
    Lives in western U.S., and is visually similar to *P. a.
    septentrionalis* but with paler edges to the wings and tail.[30][31]
-   *Poecile atricapillus practicus*
    <small>([Oberholser](Harry_C._Oberholser "wikilink"), 1937)</small>:
    Lives in the [Appalachian
    mountains](Appalachian_mountains "wikilink") in the eastern U.S.[32]
    Similar to *P. a. atricapillus*, although slightly smaller, less
    dark on the back, and less prominent white edge to the wings and
    tail.[33]

## Description

The black-capped chickadee has a black cap and "bib" with white cheeks.
Its underparts are white with buff-colored flanks. Its back is
unstreaked and greenish gray, and the tail and wings are slate gray. It
has a black [beak](beak "wikilink") and legs, and dark brown
[irises](iris_(anatomy) "wikilink"). Males and females are generally
similar, although males have a larger bib. They can also be
distinguished based on a combination of weight and tail length.
[Tarsus](Bird_feet_and_legs "wikilink") length does not significantly
differentiate sexes.[34] Males have a wing length of , a tail length of
, a bill length of , and a tarsus length of . Females are on average
slightly smaller, with a wing length of , a tail length of , a bill
length of , and a tarsus length of . Both sexes weigh .[35] Juveniles
are visually similar to adults but with fluffier plumage.[36]

Although range can generally be used to separate them, the black-capped
chickadee is very similar in appearance to the [Carolina
chickadee](Carolina_chickadee "wikilink"). The edges of the wings are
somewhat paler than the Carolina chickadee, and the bib of the
black-capped chickadee has a "messier" border than the Carolina
chickadee. The most reliable way to distinguish the two species is by
vocalizations. Black-capped chickadees have a slower, hoarser, two-part
song, whereas Carolina chickadees have a three-part song.[37]

Black-capped chickadees are also somewhat similar to [mountain
chickadees](mountain_chickadee "wikilink") and [boreal
chickadees](boreal_chickadee "wikilink"). Mountain chickadees can be
distinguished by a distinct white stripe above their eyes, and boreal
chickadees have a brown cap as opposed to the black cap of the
black-capped chickadee.[38]

### Vocalization

The vocalizations of the black-capped chickadee are highly complex, with
16 distinct types of vocalizations being used to convey an array of
information.[39] These vocalizations are likely an evolutionary
adaptation to their habitat; they live and feed in dense vegetation, and
even when the flock is close together, individual birds tend to be out
of each other's visual range.[40]

One of the most recognizable sounds produced, particularly by the males,
is the two-note *fee-bee* song. It is a simple, clear whistle of two
notes, identical in rhythm, the first roughly a
[whole-step](Major_second "wikilink") above the second.[41] The
frequency of their songs will typically start around
400 [Hz](Hertz "wikilink"), and various tones spanning roughly 1 kHz
will be sung within the song. A decrease of roughly 200 Hz occurs when
the first note (*fee*) is sung, and then another decrease around 400 Hz
takes place between the end of *fee* and the beginning of *bee*. In
spite of these multiple changes in frequency, though, anybody listening
to the song only hears a pure, high-frequency tone.[42] This is
distinguished from the Carolina chickadee's four-note call *fee-bee
fee-bay*; the lower notes are nearly identical but the higher *fee*
notes are omitted, making the black-capped song like *bee bay*. The
males sing the song only in relative isolation from other chickadees
(including their mates). In late summer, some young birds sing only a
single note.[43]

Both sexes sometimes make a faint version of the *fee-bee* song, and
this appears to be used when feeding young.[44] During breeding, the
male may make this call to attempt to attract a female. During nesting,
this call is used by both sexes to call to their partner when not in
sight.[45] Distinguishing males and females based solely on their
singing is difficult. A [bioacoustic analysis](Bioacoustics "wikilink")
performed on both male and female songs revealed that male *fee-bee*
singing fluctuates more, and the absolute
[amplitude](amplitude "wikilink") of both sexes is the same.[46]

The most familiar call is the *chick-a-dee-dee-dee*, which gave this
bird its name. This simple-sounding call is astonishingly complex.[47]
Scientists have been studying it since the mid-1970s. It is produced by
both males and females year-round.[48] It has been observed to consist
of up to four distinct units—referred to as A, B, C, and D. A, B, and C
are variations of the "chick-a" part of the call, and D is the repeated
"dee". These can be arranged in different patterns to communicate
information about threats from predators and coordination of group
movement. These four notes only ever appear in this consecutive order
with each preceding note blending into the next; however, not all four
notes always appear in the call.[49][50][51] Like other sounds the
chickadee produces, it may be heard in multiple variations. The A and B
notes are almost identical to one another in both frequency and
duration, though black-capped chickadees possess the ability to quickly
notice the difference between these two notes. No such similarity is
seen between the C and D notes.[52] The C note fluctuates from low to
high then back to low, whereas the D note has a constant frequency.
While not confirmed, one study found evidence of a function behind the C
and D notes: the C note is used indicate the location of food, and the D
note is used to distinguish between a member of the same species and a
potential predator.[53]

Neither individual notes nor groups of notes have an equal probability
of appearing in the *chick-a-dee-dee-dee* song. Its
[syntax](Bird_vocalization "wikilink") form may take on several
different structures, but the two most commonly heard are \[A\]\[D\] and
\[B\]\[C\]\[D\]. Calls containing the D note are most frequently
heard.[54] A study of the call showed that the number of *dee*s
indicates the level of threat from nearby predators. In an analysis of
over 5,000 alarm calls from chickadees, alarm calls triggered by small,
dangerous [raptors](Bird_of_prey "wikilink") had a shorter interval
between *chick* and *dee* and tended to have extra *dee*s, typically
four instead of two. In one case, a warning call about a [pygmy
owl](pygmy_owl "wikilink")—a prime threat to chickadees—contained 23
*dee*s. The Carolina chickadee makes a similar call, which is faster and
higher-pitched.[55]

Other species have also been observed making use of these
*chick-a-dee-dee-dee* alarm calls. During the non-breeding season, mixed
species flocks may form to help with foraging and predator avoidance,
and may include nuthatches, woodpeckers, kinglets, and vireos among
others.[56] These species will react when a chickadee makes the alarm
call.[57] [Red-breasted nuthatch](Red-breasted_nuthatch "wikilink") have
even been observed reacting more strongly to higher-threat alarm calls,
indicating some understanding of their syntax.[58]

Black-capped chickadees make a number of other calls and sounds, such as
a *gargle* noise usually used by males to indicate a threat of attacking
another male, often when feeding. This call is also used in sexual
contexts.[59] Black-capped chickadees learn the *gargle* noise soon
after birth and continues to develop it through to adulthood.[60] This
noise is among the most complex of the calls; in one population of
chickadees, the *gargle* contained 2 to 9 instances of 14 distinct
notes, all sung within half a second.[61]

Social learning in particular is largely influential to the development
of the *gargle*. Beginning 30 to 35 days after birth, strings of
low-amplitude precursor or sub-*gargles* are produced for about a
minute. At this time, they learn to produce such sounds by listening to
their parents and siblings. Three chickadee populations were observed at
three different sites over 8 years, and all of them produced
vocalizations that were very similar to one another. Strings of juvenile
sub-*gargles* are almost perfectly continuous and both low and unstable
in frequency, yet lacking multiple syllables. When their vocal abilities
are fully developed, a stable frequency is produced and a variety of
syllables is heard that vary in length.[62]

Other calls which have been noted include a "broken *dee*", "variable
*see*", *hiss*, *snarl* *twitter*, "high *zee*", and *tseet*. Some of
these calls are used during breeding to attract a mate or reinforce a
pair bond, such as the "broken *dee*" and "variable *see*". Others, such
as the *snarl* and *twitter*, are used territorially.[63]

Black-capped chickadees in an environment with ambient noise at the same
frequencies as their songs are able to adjust the frequency of their
songs to effectively communicate with the surrounding population. When
interacting with other chickadees close by, the males matched their
frequencies; however, when the surrounding environment was noisy with
other species, the males adapted by increasing the frequency of their
songs. Another survey, though, showed that male chickadees sometimes
intentionally match the tones of competing chickadees as a way of
showing aggression. Dominant males in a population often compete with
lower-ranked males, and singing contests are a way male chickadees
decide who gets to mate. When a male loses a contest, particularly a
higher-ranking male in the population, he will often have difficulty
finding a mate.[64]

## Distribution and habitat

Black-capped chickadees are [non-migratory](Bird_migration "wikilink")
and can be found throughout much of North America.[65] They range from
western Alaska, through southern Yukon and throughout the Canadian
provinces, from British Columbia in the west to the
[Maritimes](Maritimes "wikilink") and Newfoundland in the east. The
distribution continues into the United States, with its range extending
to northern California in the south-west, through northern Nevada and
New Mexico, continuing through the midwestern United States to New
Jersey. It can also be found in the [Appalachian
Mountains](Appalachian_Mountains "wikilink") at higher elevations.[66]
In British Columbia, the black-capped chickadee is absent on [Vancouver
Island](Vancouver_Island "wikilink"), the [Gulf
Islands](Gulf_Islands "wikilink"), [Haida
Gwaii](Haida_Gwaii "wikilink"), and parts of the [Sunshine
Coast](Sunshine_Coast_(British_Columbia) "wikilink"), where it is
replaced by the [chestnut-backed
chickadee](chestnut-backed_chickadee "wikilink").[67][68] They are
typically most common at elevations below ,[69] although they have been
known to occur at up to .[70]

Black-capped chickadees inhabit wooded areas, including both
[coniferous](Coniferous_forest "wikilink") and
[deciduous](Deciduous_forest "wikilink") forests, urban parks, willow
thickets, and suburban areas. They do not vary their habitat between
breeding and non-breeding seasons, although in the winter irregular
[Bird migration and
dispersal](Bird_migration#Irruptions_and_dispersal "wikilink") may
occur.[71]

## Behaviour and ecology

### Diet and foraging

Insects (especially caterpillars) form a large part of their diet in
summer. The birds hop along tree branches searching for food, sometimes
hanging upside down or hovering; they may make short flights to catch
insects in the air. Seeds and berries become more important in winter,
though insect eggs and pupae are eaten when available.[72] Black-capped
chickadees have also been known to eat the fat off of dead mammals.[73]
Sunflower seeds are readily taken from bird feeders. The birds take a
seed in their beak and commonly fly from the feeder to a tree, where
they proceed to hammer the seed on a branch to open it.[74]

Like many other species in the family Paridae, black-capped chickadees
commonly [cache](Hoarding_(animal_behavior) "wikilink") food, mostly
seeds, but sometimes insects, also.[75] Items are stored singly in
various sites such as bark, dead leaves, clusters of conifer needles, or
knothole. Memory for the location of caches can last up to 28 days.[76]
Within the first 24 hours, the birds can even remember the relative
quality of the stored items.[77]

This caching behavoiur has led to black-capped chickadees having larger
[hippocampi](Hippocampus "wikilink") compared to other chickadees, who
themselves have relatively larger hippocampi compared to other caching
birds in the Paridae family.[78][79] This variation in size also exists
within the black-capped chickadee population based on the region they
inhabit, with those who live in harsher climates (such as Alaska) having
larger hippocampi.[80] However, no variation exists between the
sexes.[81] The size of the hippocampus within black-capped chickadees
also varies throughout the year, being the largest in October, and the
smallest in February. While the exact reason for this seasonal change is
unknown, it is believed that the hippocampus grows to allow the
chickadee to remember its cache locations, and then shrinks as those
caches are used up.[82][83]

Foraging behaviour in the winter tends to decrease, primarily being
affected by lower temperatures and stronger winds.[84] In parts of the
black-capped chickadee's range with very cold winters, such as
Minnesota, survival rates are affected by access to supplemental food.
Chickadees with access to bird feeders are twice as likely to survive
the winter than those without access to this supplemental food. This
difference in survival rates occurs primarily during months with severe
weather when the temperature drops below for more than five days.[85] In
Pennsylvania, with milder winters on the southern edge of their range,
differences between populations with and without feeders suggest that
feeders influence movements of chickadees rather than actual
survival.[86]

### Metabolism

On cold winter nights, these birds can reduce their body temperature by
as much as 12 °C (from their normal temperature of about 42 °C) to
conserve energy.[87][88] Such a capacity for [torpor](torpor "wikilink")
is not very common in birds. Other bird species capable of torpor
include the [common swift](common_swift "wikilink") (*Apus apus*), the
[common poor-will](common_poor-will "wikilink") (*Phalaenoptilus
nuttallii*), the [lesser nighthawk](lesser_nighthawk "wikilink")
(*Chordeiles acutipennis*), and various species of
[hummingbirds](hummingbird "wikilink").[89][90]

### Movement and roosting

During the winter, chickadees often
[flock](Flocking_(behavior) "wikilink") together. Many other species of
birds – including [titmice](titmice "wikilink"),
[nuthatches](nuthatches "wikilink"), and
[warblers](New_World_warbler "wikilink") – can often be found foraging
in these flocks. [Mixed flocks](Mixed-species_feeding_flock "wikilink")
stay together because the chickadees call out whenever they find a good
source of food. This calling-out forms cohesion for the group, allowing
the other birds to find food more efficiently.[91][92] Black-capped
chickadees sleep in thick vegetation or in cavities, usually singly,
though they may occasionally roost clumped together.[93]

Their flight is slightly undulating with rapid wing beats. Flights are
typically short bursts of less than with a speed around .[94] They tend
to avoid flying through large open areas and will instead be found
flying along tree-lines or through forests.[95]

### Molt

Chickadees molt once a year; no molt prior to breeding occurs in the
spring. The molt usually lasts two to three months, starting in July or
August. The postjuvenal molt at the end of the first summer of life is
partial, involving only the body feathers and wing coverts. In
subsequent years, the postnuptial molt at the end of each reproductive
season are always complete, involving all feathers. Molting chickadees
are not often seen, preferring to remain silent and hidden from
view.[96]

### Dominance hierarchy

During the winter, the species forms flocks through which dominance
hierarchies can be easily observed. Dominance hierarchies play an
important role in determining the social behaviours among the birds in
these flocks. Chickadees' with higher social rankings have better access
to food during the winter, which leads to them having a better body
condition, increased territory size, and higher reproductive
success.[97][98] The hierarchies are linear and stable; once a
relationship is established between two birds, it stays the same for
many years. In general, older and more experienced birds are dominant
over younger ones, and males are dominant over females.[99] Dominant and
subordinate members differ in their foraging strategies and risk-taking
behaviours. Dominant individuals control access to preferred resources
and restrict subordinates to foraging in novel, riskier, or suboptimal
environments.[100] A 2011 study demonstrated that this results in
subordinate individuals being less cautious approaching novel foods and
objects compared to their dominant counterparts. This is similar to
subordinate primates, which feed on novel food more readily than the
dominant individuals because they are more used to eating suboptimal and
unfamiliar food. No difference is observed in ability to learn novel
foraging tasks between dominant and subordinate individuals.[101]

### Breeding

Black-capped chickadees start to form breeding pairs in the late fall
and into the winter. In the spring, the winter flocks will disperse into
the constituent pairs. Black-capped chickadees are largely
[monogamous](Monogamy_in_animals "wikilink") during this time, although
occasionally males are observed mating with multiple females.[102]
Females prefer dominant males, and greater reproductive success is
closely related to the higher ranking of the male.[103]

The black-capped chickadee nests in tree cavities above ground.[104] The
pair either excavates the hole together, uses a natural cavity, or
reuses an old [woodpecker](woodpecker "wikilink") nest. This species
will also nest in a [nest box](nest_box "wikilink"). Nest sites are
typically chosen by females, but excavation of the cavity is done by
both sexes. The nest itself is built by the female only and consists of
a base of coarse material such as moss or bark strips, and lining of
finer material such as mammal hair.[105] The nesting season is from late
April through June, with higher-ranking females nesting before lower
ranking ones. Eggs are white with fine dots of reddish brown
concentrated at the larger end. On average, eggs are . Clutch size is
six to eight eggs. Incubation lasts 11–14 days and is by the female
only, which is fed by the male.[106] If an unusual disturbance occurs at
the nest entrance, the incubating female may utter an explosive hiss,
like that of a snake, a probable adaptation to discourage nest
predators.[107]

Hatchlings are [altricial](altricial "wikilink"), and are born
featherless with their eyes closed. Nestlings are fed by both sexes, but
are brooded by the female only (when the male brings food to her, which
she passes on to the young). Young leave the nest 12–16 days after
hatching, in great part because the parents start presenting food only
outside the nest hole. The young are still fed by the parents for
several weeks, but are capable of catching food on their own within a
week after leaving the nest.[108]

Black-capped chickadees usually breed only once a year, but second
broods are possible if the first one is lost. First breeding is at one
year of age. Maximum recorded lifespan is 12 years,[109] although most
live roughly 2.5 years.[110]

Black-capped chickadees may interbreed with Carolina chickadees or
[mountain chickadees](mountain_chickadee "wikilink") where their ranges
overlap.[111][112] Interbreeding with [boreal
chickadees](boreal_chickadee "wikilink") has also been documented,
though it is more rare.[113]

### Predators and parasites

Black-capped chickadees are primarily subject to predation by [birds of
prey](birds_of_prey "wikilink"), including owls, hawks, and shrikes.
Nest-predation also occurs, primarily by raccoons, squirrels, opossums,
and snakes.[114] Nest sites are also sometimes raided by [house
wrens](house_wren "wikilink"), who will destroy chickadee eggs in order
to reuse the location for their nest.[115]

Like many birds, black-capped chickadees are susceptible to [West Nile
Virus](West_Nile_Virus "wikilink"). They are also known to be affected
by blood parasites, including those that cause
[malaria](malaria "wikilink"), but particularly high rates of infection
have not been detected.[116] Black-capped chickadees are also known to
be affected by [avian keratin
disorder](avian_keratin_disorder "wikilink").[117]

## State and provincial bird

The black-capped chickadee is the [state
bird](List_of_U.S._state_birds "wikilink") of Maine and Massachusetts
and the [provincial
bird](List_of_Canadian_provincial_and_territorial_symbols "wikilink") of
New Brunswick.[118][119][120] In 2022 the black-capped chickadee was
named the official bird of [Calgary,
Alberta](Calgary,_Alberta "wikilink").[121] The bird is prominently
featured on the standard Maine vehicle registration plate.[122]

## Conservation

The [IUCN](IUCN "wikilink") classifies the black-capped chickadee as
[least concern](least-concern_species "wikilink") due to its wide
distribution and large populations. While the exact population is
unknown, yearly bird counts such as the [Christmas Bird
Count](Christmas_Bird_Count "wikilink") indicate that the population is
increasing.[123]

Black-capped chickadees are known to suffer from human-related mortality
causes such as flying into windows or dying from ingesting pesticide.
Additionally, pets such as cats pose a threat to chickadees.[124]