# DMC DeLorean

The **DMC DeLorean** is a rear-engine two-passenger [sports
car](sports_car "wikilink") manufactured and marketed by [John
DeLorean](John_DeLorean "wikilink")'s [DeLorean Motor
Company](DeLorean_Motor_Company "wikilink") (DMC) for the American
market from 1981 until 1983—ultimately the only car brought to market by
the fledgling company. The DeLorean is sometimes referred to by its
internal DMC pre-production designation, **DMC-12**.[1][2][3] However,
the DMC-12 name was never used in sales or marketing materials for the
production model.[4]

Designed by [Giorgetto Giugiaro](Giorgetto_Giugiaro "wikilink"), the
DeLorean is noted for its [gull-wing doors](gull-wing_door "wikilink")
and brushed stainless-steel outer body panels, as well as its lack of
power and performance incongruous with its looks and price. Though its
production was short-lived, the DeLorean became widely known after it
was featured as [the time machine](DeLorean_time_machine "wikilink") in
the [*Back to the Future*](Back_to_the_Future_(franchise) "wikilink")
films.

With the first production car completed on January 21, 1981, the design
incorporated numerous minor revisions to the hood, wheels and interior
before production ended in late December 1982, shortly after DMC filed
for bankruptcy and after total production reached between 8,500 and
9,600 units.

Despite the car having a reputation for poor build quality and an
unsatisfactory driving experience, the DeLorean continues to have a
strong following driven in part by the popularity of *Back to the
Future*. 6,500 DeLoreans were estimated to still be on the road as of
2015.[5]

## History

When details surrounding the DeLorean were first announced in the
mid-1970s, there were numerous plans and rumors that the DeLorean would
have many advanced features, such as elastic reservoir moulding (ERM), a
unit-construction plastic chassis, a [mid-engine
layout](Rear_mid-engine,_rear-wheel-drive_layout "wikilink"), an
[airbag](airbag "wikilink"), 10-mph bumpers and ultrawide
[Pirelli](Pirelli "wikilink") P7 tires; none of these would materialize
in the production vehicle.[6]

Originally, the car was intended to have a centrally-mounted [Wankel
rotary engine](Wankel_engine "wikilink"). The engine selection was
reconsidered when [Comotor](Comotor "wikilink") production ended and the
favored engine became the [Ford Cologne V6
engine](Ford_Cologne_V6_engine "wikilink").[7]

Appearing in October 1976, the first prototype was completed by American
automotive chief engineer William T. Collins, formerly chief engineer at
[Pontiac](Pontiac_(automobile) "wikilink"). The prototype was initially
known as the DSV-1, or DeLorean Safety Vehicle.[8] As development
continued, the model was referred to as the DSV-12,[9] before changing
to DMC-12, the "12" deriving from the target list price of $12,000 upon
release.[10]

The Ford V6 engine would soon be abandoned in favor of the complete
drivetrain from the [Citroën CX 2000](Citroën_CX "wikilink")—deemed a
more reliable choice.[11] The [I4](Straight-four_engine "wikilink")
engine from Citroën was ultimately deemed underpowered for the DeLorean.
When Citroën learned of DMC plans to turbocharge the engine, Citroën
suggested that DMC find another engine.[12] Eventually the
[fuel-injected](fuel_injection "wikilink") [V6 PRV
engine](V6_PRV_engine "wikilink")
([Peugeot](Peugeot "wikilink")-[Renault](Renault "wikilink")-[Volvo](Volvo "wikilink"))
was selected. As a result, the engine location had to be moved from the
mid-engined location in Prototype 1 to a rear-engined location in
Prototype 2, a configuration which would be retained in the production
vehicle.[13]

The [chassis](chassis "wikilink") was initially planned to use elastic
reservoir moulding (ERM), which would lighten the car and lower its
production costs. DeLorean had purchased patent rights to the
essentially untested ERM technology, and it was eventually found
unsuitable.[14]

Prototype 1's interior was significantly different from the production
vehicle's. Prototype 1 had a prominent full-width knee bar, as it was
intended to be a safety car. A medium brown leather covered the seats,
but they were much flatter and did not have the comfort and support of
the production seats. A black steering wheel with a fat center was
intended to hold an airbag and the driver had a full set of
[Stewart-Warner](Stewart-Warner "wikilink") gauges. A central warning
system would check various fluid levels and even warn of low brake pad
thickness though, even at this time, it was suspected that production
cars would not have this feature.[15]

These and other changes to the original concept led to considerable
schedule pressures. The design was deemed to require almost complete
re-engineering, which was turned over to English engineer [Colin
Chapman](Colin_Chapman "wikilink"), founder of [Lotus
Cars](Lotus_Cars "wikilink"). Chapman replaced most of the unproven
material and manufacturing techniques with those then employed by Lotus,
including a steel backbone chassis.[16]

In order to train the workforce, a small number of pre-production
DeLoreans were produced with fiberglass bodies and are referred to as
"black cars" or [mules](Development_mule "wikilink").[17] After several
delays and cost overruns, production at the
[Dunmurry](Dunmurry "wikilink") factory, located a few miles from
[Belfast](Belfast "wikilink") City Centre, finally began in late 1980.
DMC changed the name DMC-12 on its now $25,000 car in favor of the model
name DeLorean. The DeLorean sports car, as it was described in
advertisements,[18] began production in December 1980 with the first
production car rolling off the assembly line on January 21,
1981..[19][20]

The DeLorean Motor Company was placed into
[receivership](receivership "wikilink") in February 1982 and filed
[bankruptcy](bankruptcy "wikilink") on October 26 of that year,[21] just
a few days after the arrest of its founder, [John
DeLorean](John_DeLorean "wikilink"), on
[drug-trafficking](drug_trafficking "wikilink") charges.[22]
[Consolidated International](Big_Lots "wikilink") purchased the unsold
DeLoreans and partially completed DeLoreans still on the assembly line
and assembled approximately 100 cars[23] to finish the remaining
production on December 24, 1982.[24]

## Sales and production

### Sales

Prior to the
release of the DeLorean, there was a waiting list of eager buyers, many
of whom paid over [MSRP](List_price#Automobiles/motorcars "wikilink").
However, that exuberance subsided very quickly and production output
soon far exceeded sales volume. October 1981 was the highest month of
sales for DMC with 720 vehicles sold but by December, the US was falling
into
[recession](Early_1980s_recession_in_the_United_States#1981–1982 "wikilink")
and interest rates were rising which further negatively impacted sales.
Despite this, instead of reducing production, John DeLorean doubled
production output, further adding to the inventory of unsold cars. By
the end of 1981, DMC had produced 7,500 cars but had sold only
3,000.[25] By this point, DMC was in a financial hardship having sold
only 350 units in January 1982[26] and in February of that year, DMC was
placed into receivership.[27]

In February 1982, unsold 1981 model year cars were "priced for immediate
clearance" in hopes to make room for the more expensive 1982 model year
cars. In March, telegrams were sent to all 343 dealerships requesting
each buy six cars to help save the company; none of the dealers
responded with a sales order. By this point, dealers were sitting on
unsold inventory as were the quality assurance centers and hundreds more
sitting on the docks in [Long Beach](Long_Beach "wikilink"), California.
By the end of May 1982, production at the factory was shut down. Another
attempt in July 1982 was made to revive sales by offering discounts to
dealerships and offering a 5-year/ warranty with the first year or
portion secured by a major insurance carrier but this was not
successful.[28]

Bruce McWilliams, VP of Marketing for DMC and later acting President for
DMC America, after resigning his position said, "The car could never be
sold in the numbers John DeLorean predicted".[29]

### Production

Production information was lost or scattered upon the [shutdown of
DMC](DeLorean_Motor_Company#Downturn_and_bankruptcy "wikilink") and
production figures for the DeLorean were never verified based on
official factory records. Owners have been able to piece together the
approximate quantity of DeLoreans produced from VIN information, despite
some unexplained VIN gaps.[30]

In February 1982, DMC was placed into receivership and the factory
continued to operate at a reduced production rate until the end of May.
When Consolidated International acquired the unsold and partially
assembled cars in November 1982, it brought back workers to complete the
cars remaining on the assembly line. It was decided to make the
remaining completed 1982 model year cars into 1983 models. The remaining
cars' VINs were re-VINed into 1983 cars by taking the original VIN and
adding 5000 to it and changing the "CD" in the middle of the VIN to "DD"
thus making a 1983 model. For the 1981 model year, there were 6,700
DeLoreans produced (VIN 500–7199). For the 1982 model year, there were
1,999 DeLoreans produced (VIN 10001–11999). For the 1983 model year,
there were 276 DeLoreans (VIN 17000–17170 and 20001–20105) bringing the
total estimated production to 8,975 cars.[31]

## Construction

The DeLorean features a number of unusual construction details,
including gull-wing doors, unpainted
[stainless-steel](stainless-steel "wikilink") body panels, and a
[rear-mounted engine](Rear-engine_design "wikilink").

### Body

The body design of the DeLorean was a product of [Giorgetto
Giugiaro](Giorgetto_Giugiaro "wikilink") of
[Italdesign](Italdesign_Giugiaro "wikilink"). To create the car,
Giugiaro drew on one of his previous works, the [Porsche
Tapiro](Porsche_Tapiro "wikilink"), a concept car from 1970.[32] The
body is paneled in brushed [SS304](SAE_304_stainless_steel "wikilink")
[austenitic stainless steel](austenitic_stainless_steel "wikilink"),[33]
and except for three cars plated in 24-karat gold, all DeLoreans left
the factory uncovered by paint or clearcoat. Painted DeLoreans do exist,
although these were all painted after the cars were purchased from the
factory.[34]

The stainless-steel panels are fixed to a
[fiberglass](fiberglass "wikilink") underbody. The underbody is affixed
to a steel [backbone chassis](backbone_chassis "wikilink") with Y-frames
at either end, derived from the [Lotus Esprit](Lotus_Esprit "wikilink")
platform.[35] The chassis was coated with [epoxy](epoxy "wikilink"), a
material to protect steel against corrosion.[36]

Another distinctive feature of the DeLorean is its [gull-wing
doors](gull-wing_door "wikilink"). The DeLorean features heavy doors
supported by [cryogenically](Cryogenics "wikilink") preset [torsion
bars](Torsion_bar_suspension "wikilink") and nitrogen-charged
[struts](strut "wikilink").[37][38] These torsion bars and struts were
developed by American aircraft company [Grumman
Aerospace](Grumman_Aircraft_Engineering_Corporation "wikilink").[39] The
doors featured red and amber lights to mark their edges at night and
small cutout windows,[40] because full-sized windows would not be fully
retractable within the short door panels. Although early-production cars
had fitment problems due to faulty striker plates and issues with
weather seals, these were mostly tolerated because gull-wing doors
actually allowed occupants to enter and exit the car in tight parking
places, as well as attracting attention from people nearby.[41]

### Engine and drivetrain

The DeLorean's engine is a
[SOHC](Overhead_camshaft_engine#Single_overhead_camshaft_(SOHC) "wikilink")
[Peugeot](Peugeot "wikilink")-[Renault](Renault "wikilink")-[Volvo](Volvo "wikilink")
[(PRV) V6 engine](V6_PRV_engine "wikilink"). The U.S. federally–tuned,
catalyst-equipped DeLorean engine is rated at at 5,500 rpm and
[torque](torque "wikilink") of at 2,750 rpm.[42] Only a handful of cars
that stayed in Europe, were allowed to keep their rating.[43] These PRVs
were a development of the 2.7-litre V6 used in the [Renault
30](Renault_30 "wikilink") that were designed and built under special
contract with the DeLorean Motor Company.[44]

This engine has a 90-degree layout with a
light-[alloy](alloy "wikilink") [block](engine_block "wikilink") with
cast iron cylinder liners and light-alloy
[heads](cylinder_head "wikilink") with cross-flow hemi-chambers.[45] It
is cooled by a front-mounted
[radiator](Radiator_(engine_cooling) "wikilink") with
twin-thermostatically controlled electric cooling fans.[46] The engine
has a [bore](Bore_(engine) "wikilink") and
[stroke](Stroke_(engine) "wikilink"), a [compression
ratio](compression_ratio "wikilink") of 8.8:1 and was fitted with a
[Bosch](Robert_Bosch_GmbH "wikilink") K-Jetronic [fuel
injection](fuel_injection "wikilink") system.[47]

Two transmissions were available for the DeLorean: a 5-speed
[manual](manual_transmission "wikilink") and a 3-speed
[automatic](automatic_transmission "wikilink"), both with a [final drive
ratio](gear_ratio "wikilink") of 3.44:1.[48]

### Suspension and wheels

The DeLorean has a four-wheel [independent
suspension](independent_suspension "wikilink") with [coil
springs](coil_spring "wikilink"), and telescopic [shock
absorbers](shock_absorbers "wikilink"). The front suspension uses
[double wishbones](Double_wishbone_suspension "wikilink"), while the
rear is a [multi-link](Multi-link_suspension "wikilink") setup.[49]

When the DeLorean first arrived in the US, the car had a
higher-than-expected wheel gap in the front suspension. Despite having
significantly less weight in the front, the front and rear springs had
the same spring rate and used lower-quality steel, which resulted in the
nose-high look.[50] Some people have cited a last-minute change in US
bumper height requirements led DMC to raise the vehicle just prior to
delivery; however, this is not true. Design drawings show that the
design met
[NHTSA](National_Highway_Traffic_Safety_Administration "wikilink")
minimum bumper and headlight heights of the time.[51][52]

Steering is [rack and pinion](rack_and_pinion "wikilink"), with an
overall [steering ratio](steering_ratio "wikilink") of 14.9:1, giving
2.65 turns lock-to-lock and a [curb-to-curb turning
circle](Turning_radius#Curb-to-curb "wikilink"). DeLoreans are equipped
with [cast alloy](alloy "wikilink") wheels, that are *staggered* in
dimension, matching the car's wedge-shape, measuring in diameter by wide
on the front and in diameter by wide on the rear. These were fitted with
195/60-14 (front) and 235/60-15 (rear)
[Goodyear](Goodyear_Tire_and_Rubber_Company "wikilink") NCT steel-belted
radial tires. The DeLorean is a [rear-engine
vehicle](Rear-engine,_rear-wheel-drive_layout "wikilink") with a 35%–65%
front–rear weight distribution.[53]

The DeLorean features power-assisted [disc
brakes](disc_brake "wikilink") on all wheels, with rotors in front and
in the rear.[54]

## Reception

The automotive press was generally complimentary. *[Motor
Trend](Motor_Trend "wikilink")*, *[Car and
Driver](Car_and_Driver "wikilink")* and *[Road &
Track](Road_&_Track "wikilink")* made generally positive remarks about
the car, particularly its daily-driver qualities, like the comfortable
seats on longer drives, unexpected ease of in- and egress in tight
parking, and for such a low car, spacious trunk, pleasant smell of the
standard leather seats in the cabin, and commendable fuel economy.
However, they argued that the DeLorean is more a [grand
touring](grand_tourer "wikilink") (GT) car, offering enjoyable handling
and performance in real life traffic, and on your favorite two-lane
roads, than a sports car, let alone track car, given its disappointing
performance in comparative testing.[55][56][57]

Later reviews have been harsher. In 2017,
[*Time*](Time_(magazine) "wikilink") included the DeLorean in its list
of the 50 worst cars of all time.[58] In his book *Naff Motors: 101
Automotive Lemons*, Tony Davis described the build quality as
"woeful".[59] *[Top Gear](Top_Gear_(2002_TV_series) "wikilink")* writer
Richard Porter included it in his book *Crap Cars*, calling it
"dismal".[60]

## Performance

DMC's comparison literature noted that the DeLorean could achieve in 8.8
seconds when equipped with a manual transmission,[61] but other sources
indicate an acceleration time of 9.5 seconds.[62] When equipped with a
manual transmission, the DeLorean accelerated from in 10.5 seconds as
tested by *Road & Track* magazine. Top speed was claimed at , but was
tested to be a lacking .[63][64] *[Car &
Driver](Car_&_Driver "wikilink")* put the top speed of a 5-speed manual
at (indicated).[65]

The car was described as "not quick for a sports/GT car in this price
category" by *Road & Track*.[66]

## Quality problems

DeLoreans, early-production models in particular, suffered from poor
build quality as well as mechanical issues. Early-production cars needed
as much as 200 hours of work at DMC Quality Assurance Centers prior to
being shipped to dealerships for delivery.[67] DMC eventually sent 30
factory workers to the quality centers in the US to learn about the
problems and how to fix them.[68] Quality did improve over time, and by
1982 many of the quality issues had been resolved.[69] A total of four
[recalls](Product_recall "wikilink") were issued by the factory to
correct problems such as a sticking throttle, front-suspension issues
and an inertia switch.[70]

Other quality issues included additional problems surrounding the front
suspension, clutch pedal adjustment (or lack thereof), brake rotors,
instruments, in particular the [speedometer](speedometer "wikilink"),
power door locks and weak
[alternators](Alternator_(automotive) "wikilink"). Many early DeLoreans
were delivered poorly aligned, with the
[toe-in](Toe_(automotive) "wikilink") incorrectly set, leading to
premature tire wear. In addition, many dealers were reluctant to perform
warranty work on DeLoreans, since DMC owed them money for past warranty
claims. Some dealerships were not able to perform repair work properly,
as DMC never issued a proper service manual. The lack of quality service
at dealerships was a point of frustration for many DeLorean owners at
the time, particularly those who paid over sticker price to purchase one
of the first cars.[71]

## Pricing and options

### Base price

Upon release in 1981, a DeLorean had a base MSRP of $25,000, or . MSRP
increased in 1982 to $29,825,[72] , and again in 1983 to $34,000,[73] .

### Options

A 3-speed automatic transmission, priced at $650 MSRP, was the only
extra-cost factory option. Interior color choices were grey or black.
The grey interior became available mid-1981 model year.[74] The standard
feature list included stainless-steel body panels, gull-wing doors with
cryogenically-treated torsion bars, 5-speed [manual
transmission](manual_transmission "wikilink"), [Bridge of
Weir](Bridge_of_Weir#Leather "wikilink") leather seats,[75] [air
conditioning](air_conditioning "wikilink"), AM/FM
[cassette](Compact_Cassette "wikilink") [stereo
system](stereo_system "wikilink"), [power
windows](power_window "wikilink"), [locks](power_door_locks "wikilink")
and [mirrors](Power_side-view_mirror "wikilink"), a tilt and telescopic
[steering wheel](steering_wheel "wikilink"), tinted glass, body side
moldings, intermittent windshield wipers, and electric rear-window
defogger.[76]

Several dealer options were available, including a car cover,
[sheepskin](Sheepskin_seat_cover "wikilink") seat covers, floor mats,
car care cleaning kit, black textured accent stripes, grey scotch-cal
accent stripes, a luggage rack and a ski-rack adapter.[77]

## Production changes

Although there were no typical yearly updates to the DeLorean, several
changes were made to the DeLorean during production.[78] Instead of
making changes at the end of the model year, DMC implemented changes
mid-production. This resulted in no clear distinction between the 1981,
1982, and 1983 model years, but with subtle changes taking place almost
continuously throughout the production run.

### Hood styles

The original [hood](hood_(vehicle) "wikilink") of the DeLorean had
[grooves](Groove_(machining) "wikilink") running down both sides. It
included a fuel filler flap to simplify [fuel
filling](Filling_station "wikilink"). These cars typically had a locking
fuel cap to prevent fuel tampering or theft by
[siphoning](siphon "wikilink"). In August 1981, the fuel flap was
removed from the hood (although the hood creases remained). After the
supply of locking caps was exhausted, the company switched to a
non-locking fuel cap (resulting in at least 500 cars with no hood flap,
but with locking fuel caps). The final styling for the hood included the
addition of a cast-metal DeLorean emblem in the lower right corner and
the removal of the grooves, resulting in a completely flat hood. This
final version was on all 1982–1983 model year vehicles.[79]

### Other changes

Closing the gull-wing door from the inside can be achieved by using a
grab handle. For people with shorter arms, DMC installed leather pull
straps attached to the grab handle. Beginning with late-model 1981 cars,
DMC revised the location of the leather pull strap to be centrally
mounted and integrated into the lower door panel.[80]

The rear trim panel has an armrest extension that is visibly two
separate pieces on early 1981 models; this armrest has a tendency to
break loose as people get in and out of the vehicle. In late 1981, this
was resolved by having the armrest extension integrated into the rear
trim panel, the assembly wrapped in vacuum-formed vinyl.[81]

Although the styling of the DeLorean's wheels remained unchanged, the
wheels of early 1981 models were painted grey. These wheels sported
matching grey center caps with an embossed DMC logo. Early into the 1981
production run, these were changed to a polished silver look, with a
contrasting black center cap. The embossed logo on the center caps was
painted silver to add contrast.[82]

In 1981, the DeLorean came with a [Craig](Craig_Electronics "wikilink")
AM/FM stereo radio with cassette. Since the Craig radio did not have a
built-in clock, one was installed in front of the [gear
shift](gear_shift "wikilink") on the console. The Craig radio was
replaced with an ASI radio in the middle of the 1982 production run.
Since the ASI radio featured an on-board clock, the clock on the console
was removed at the same time.[83]

The first 2,200 cars produced used a windshield-embedded
[antenna](antenna_(radio) "wikilink"). This type of antenna proved to be
unsuitable with poor radio reception. Oftentimes the radio would
continually "seek", attempting to find a signal. A standard whip
antenna, which was later changed to a manually retractable antenna, was
added to the outside of the front right fender. Despite improving radio
reception, this resulted in a hole in the stainless steel, and an
unsightly antenna. As a result, the antenna was again moved. The final
antenna was an automatic retractable version installed under the rear
induction grill behind the rear driver's-side window.[84]

The small [sun visors](visor "wikilink") on the DeLorean have vinyl on
one side and headliner fabric on the other side. Originally these were
installed such that the headliner side would be on the bottom when not
in use. Later on in 1981, they were reversed so that the vinyl side
would be on the bottom.[85]

The original 80-amp Ducellier alternator supplied with the
early-production DeLoreans could not provide enough
[current](electric_current "wikilink") to supply the car when all lights
and electrical options were on; as a result, the battery would gradually
discharge, leaving the driver stranded on the road. This happened to
DeLorean-owner [Johnny Carson](Johnny_Carson "wikilink") shortly after
he was presented with the vehicle.[86] Beginning with cars built in late
1981, DeLoreans were fitted from the factory with a 90-amp
[Motorola](Motorola "wikilink") alternator, which solved this
problem.[87]


## Notable and unique exemplars

### Wooden mock-up

In March 1975, DMC entered into a contract with
[Italdesign](Italdesign_Giugiaro "wikilink") to have [Giorgetto
Giugiaro](Giorgetto_Giugiaro "wikilink") design the DeLorean sports car.
John DeLorean and Bill Collins approved one of the many designs, and the
styling [mock-up](mock-up "wikilink") that was made from "epo-wood"
(wooden framework with a special epoxy plaster[88]) was shipped to the
DMC office in Michigan on July 31, 1975.[89] This mock-up served as the
template for the prototype. The original full-size epo-wood DeLorean
styling model was modified in the first quarter 1979 to reflect the
refreshed design used in production.[90] The mock-up was donated to the
[Ulster Folk and Transport
Museum](Ulster_Folk_and_Transport_Museum "wikilink"), in
[Cultra](Cultra "wikilink"), [County Down](County_Down "wikilink")
([Northern Ireland](Northern_Ireland "wikilink")), where it is now on
display.[91]

### Prototypes and pilot cars

Only one of two DeLorean prototypes still exists. Prototype 1 was sold
at the bankruptcy auction in 1984 for $37,000.[92] The car remained in a
private collection until 2005 when it was sold, received a complete
restoration and is now on display at the [AACA
Museum](AACA_Museum "wikilink") in
[Hershey](Hershey,_Pennsylvania "wikilink"),
[Pennsylvania](Pennsylvania "wikilink").

Prototype 2 was sent to [Lotus Cars](Lotus_Cars "wikilink") for
development and evaluation in 1978. It was reported to have been
destroyed in the 1990s.[93]

An estimated 28 pilot cars were built. The pilot cars are best
identified by the subtly different interiors and sliding side windows.
These cars, used for evaluation and regulatory testing of the DeLorean
were previously thought to have been destroyed. However, a few of the
pilot cars have survived and are owned by private parties.[94]

### Visioneering car

With the 1980 [NADA](National_Automobile_Dealers_Association "wikilink")
meeting approaching, DMC planned to show a final production version of
the DeLorean; however, there were no production cars ready at the time
or even any production stainless steel panels. Earlier, in summer 1979,
the revised Giugiaro styling mock-up was shipped to Visioneering, a
[Detroit](Detroit "wikilink")-based company, to create data needed to
make the stamping dies for the stainless panels. This project expanded
to create dies used to create a "production" car for the NADA show.
Using a prototype chassis supplied by Lotus in late 1979, Visioneering
completed the assembly of this car at a cost of $750,000. The car was
presented at the 1980 NADA show and was later used for engineering
development and technical training as well as press photos. The
Visioneering car eventually was sold at the bankruptcy auction in late
1984 for $21,000.[95] The car is in a private collection.[96]

### Legend turbo cars

It was determined that the DeLorean needed additional power when
automotive magazine road tests showed times for the DeLorean between 9.5
and 10.5 seconds, while its rivals were in the 7.5–8.5 seconds range.
There had been interest in [turbocharging](turbocharger "wikilink") the
DeLorean early on, but the DMC engineering staff was busy with other
projects, so DMC decided to go outside to develop a turbocharged
version.[97]

DMC entered into a contract with Legend Industries, based in
[Hauppauge](Hauppauge,_New_York "wikilink"), [New
York](New_York_(state) "wikilink"), a firm having previous success with
turbocharging [Fiat Spiders](Fiat_124_Sport_Spider "wikilink") for Fiat
USA. DMC wanted to increase power without sacrificing [fuel
efficiency](fuel_efficiency "wikilink"). DMC wanted a wide power band
and did not want a surge of power similar to the [Porsche
930](Porsche_930 "wikilink") Turbo. Legend used twin
[IHI](IHI_Corporation "wikilink") RHB52 turbos along with twin
[intercoolers](intercooler "wikilink"). The results were an engine
capable of accelerating smoothly in fifth gear from 1,500 rpm to full
turbo boost at 2,500 rpm, reaching at 6,500 rpm.[98]

Legend converted four DeLoreans (two twin-turbo cars (VIN 502 and VIN
530) and two single-turbo cars (VIN 528 and VIN 558)).[99] In a test run
at [Bridgehampton Raceway](Bridgehampton_Race_Circuit "wikilink") in
1981, the twin-turbo DeLorean was quicker than a [Ferrari
308](Ferrari_308_GTB/GTS "wikilink") and a [Porsche
928](Porsche_928 "wikilink").[100] The twin-turbo DeLorean tested
0–60 mph in 5.8 seconds and the [](Dragstrip "wikilink") in 14.7
seconds. John DeLorean was so impressed with the engine, he committed to
ordering 5,000 engines from Legend Industries. DMC planned to offer a
turbocharged engine as a $7,500 option in 1984.[101] Before any of the
5,000 cars could be put into production, DMC had declared bankruptcy,
which drove Legend Industries, as well as other suppliers, into
bankruptcy.[102]

### Gold-plated

For Christmas 1980, a DeLorean/[American
Express](American_Express "wikilink") promotion planned to sell 100
[24K](Karat "wikilink")-[gold-plated](Gilding "wikilink") DeLoreans for
US$85,000 each to its gold-card members, but only two were sold.[103]
The first gold-plated American Express DeLorean was purchased by
Sherwood Marshall, an entrepreneur and former [Royal Canadian
Naval](Royal_Canadian_Navy "wikilink") Officer. This car, VIN 4300, is
equipped with a manual transmission and a saddle-brown interior.
Marshall donated his DeLorean to the [William F.
Harrah](William_F._Harrah "wikilink") Foundation/[National Automobile
Museum](National_Automobile_Museum "wikilink") in [Reno,
Nevada](Reno,_Nevada "wikilink").[104]

The second gold-plated DeLorean was purchased by Roger Mize, president
of Snyder National Bank in [Snyder, Texas](Snyder,_Texas "wikilink").
This car, VIN 4301, equipped with an automatic transmission and black
interior, sat in the bank lobby for over 20 years before being loaned to
the [Petersen Automotive Museum](Petersen_Automotive_Museum "wikilink")
in [Los Angeles](Los_Angeles "wikilink").[105]

A third gold-plated car was assembled with spare parts that were
required by American Express in case one of the other two that were
built was damaged. All necessary gold-plated parts were on hand, with
the exception of one door that was sourced later. The car was first
acquired by the winner of a [Big Lots](Big_Lots "wikilink") store
raffle. This car, VIN 20105, is in a private collection.[106]

Two other privately-commissioned gold-plated DeLoreans exist (one being
VIN 1542) but their whereabouts are unknown.[107]

### Right-hand-drive models

DeLoreans were primarily intended for the American market. All
production models were therefore
[left-hand-drive](left-hand-drive "wikilink"). DMC was aware as early as
April 1981 of the need to produce a
[right-hand-drive](right-hand-drive "wikilink") (RHD) version to supply
to world markets, specifically the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"). DMC faced the choice of building
right-hand-drive models from scratch or performing a post-production
conversion. Given the cost of new body molds, tooling, and a host of
specific parts that a factory-built right-hand-drive configuration would
require, the company opted to investigate the idea of a post-production
conversion using Wooler-Hodec, an English company based in [Andover,
Hampshire](Andover,_Hampshire "wikilink"). About 30 early DeLoreans were
shipped to Wooler-Hodec and the best 20 were to be converted to RHD.
However, only 13 were completed before DMCL went into receivership which
subsequently led to the closure of Wooler-Hodec.[108]

Three other factory-authorized RHD cars were built. Known as AXI cars,
these cars were registered and used by the factory in Northern Ireland,
with registration numbers (license plates), AXI 1697, AXI 1698, AXI 1699
and have minor differences from the Wooler-Hodec cars.[109]

After the liquidation of DMC, many of the factory company cars were sold
at various auctions around the UK, some of which were converted by
former Wooler-Hodec employees and DMCL engineers to RHD resulting in
eight known post-factory RHD conversions.[110]

### *Back to the Future*

The DMC DeLorean is most notably featured as the time machine in the
[*Back to the Future* film
trilogy](Back_to_the_Future_(franchise) "wikilink"). Six DeLoreans were
used during the production, along with one manufactured out of
fiberglass for scenes where a full-size DeLorean was needed to "fly"
on-screen.[111] The cars used in the [first
film](Back_to_the_Future "wikilink") had the original V6 engine (whose
sound in the movie comes from the V8 engine of a [Porsche
928](Porsche_928 "wikilink")).[112] Two of the cars used in *[Back to
the Future Part III](Back_to_the_Future_Part_III "wikilink")* were
equipped with [Volkswagen](Volkswagen "wikilink") engines and [dune
buggy](dune_buggy "wikilink") chassis for filming the scenes in the
Western terrain.[113]

Only three of the cars still exist,[114] with one that was destroyed at
the end of Part III, two additional cars were abandoned, and the
fiberglass replica used in Part II was scrapped. Universal Studios owns
two of the remaining cars, occasionally putting them on display or using
them for other productions.[115] The third car, used in *Back to the
Future Part III*, was restored and was sold at auction for $541,200 in
December 2011.[116] A fully-restored *Back to the Future* DeLorean can
be viewed at the [Petersen Automotive
Museum](Petersen_Automotive_Museum "wikilink") in Los Angeles.[117]

## New production

In 1995, Stephen Wynne, a British car mechanic from
[Liverpool](Liverpool "wikilink"), created a separate company, *DMC
Texas*, based in the northern [Houston](Houston "wikilink") suburb
[Humble, Texas](Humble,_Texas "wikilink"), using the [DeLorean Motor
Company](DeLorean_Motor_Company_(Texas) "wikilink") name. Wynne acquired
the trademark on the stylized DMC logo, along with the remaining parts
inventory of the original DeLorean Motor Company.[118]

After the passage of the [Low Volume Vehicle Manufacturing
Act](Low_Volume_Motor_Vehicle_Manufacturers_Act_of_2015 "wikilink"), DMC
Texas announced that it planned to produce replica DeLoreans. However,
due to delays by the [NHTSA](NHTSA "wikilink") in ratifying the act, the
plan was canceled. There has been discussion about DMC Texas building an
upgraded version of the original DeLorean to mark the 40th anniversary,
but no details have been released.[119]