# Game Informer

***Game Informer**'' (***GI**'') is an American monthly [video game
magazine](Video_game_journalism "wikilink") featuring articles, news,
strategy, and reviews of [video games](video_game "wikilink") and
associated [consoles](video_game_console "wikilink"). It debuted in
August 1991 when video game retailer [FuncoLand](FuncoLand "wikilink")
started publishing an in-house newsletter.[1][2] The publication is now
owned and published by [GameStop](GameStop "wikilink"), who bought
FuncoLand in 2000. Due to this, a large amount of promotion is done
in-store, which has contributed to the success of the magazine. As of
June 2017, it is the 5th most popular magazine by copies circulated.

Starting from the 2010s, *Game Informer* has transitioned to a more
online-based focus.

## History

### Magazine

*Game Informer* debuted in August 1991 as a six-page magazine. It was
published every two months until November 1994, when the magazine began
to be released monthly.[3]

Since 2001 *Game Informer* has been published by Cathy Preston, who has
been working as part of the production team since 2000.[4] It was under
her that the publication became an integral part of
[GameStop's](GameStop "wikilink") customer loyalty program, Power Up
Rewards.[5] In 2020, Cathy retired from *Game Informer* after 20 years
leaving a lasting legacy. Mary Lugones has taken over the role as
publisher for *Game Informer*.

In 2010, *Game Informer* became the 5th largest magazine in the US with
5 million copies sold, ahead of popular publications like
*[Time](Time_magazine "wikilink")*, *[Sports
Illustrated](Sports_Illustrated "wikilink")*, and
*[Playboy](Playboy "wikilink")*.[6] By 2011, *Game Informer* had become
the 3rd largest magazine in the US, topping 8 million copies
circulated.[7] However, in 2014 it had fallen to 4th place with 6.9
million copies sold.[8] Figures in 2017 placed the magazine at 4th place
with over 7 million copies sold.[9] The financial success of *Game
Informer* has been attributed to its good relationship with publishers,
ties to GameStop, and the lack of gaming-magazine competition.[10]

The April edition of *Game Informer* includes 'an annual feature *Game
Infarcer*, an [April Fools' Day prank](April_Fools'_Day "wikilink"). In
the cover box head appears "World's \#1 Pretend Magazine" where would
ordinarily appear "World's \#1 Video Game Magazine" -- "Parody" is found
at the cover bottom. *Game Infarcer* articles are accredited to the
fictional editor-in-chief Darth Clark, who is addressed in hate mail
every year sent to *Game Informer*. The heated responses to parody
articles are often featured in later *Game Informer* issues.[11][12]

*Game Informer* has included four "Sacred Cow Barbecues".[13] Similar in
style to a [celebrity roast](Roast_(comedy) "wikilink"), the occasion is
meant to "knock some of gaming's most revered icons off their high and
mighty pedestals".[14] The first *Sacred Cow Barbecues* featured in
issue 158 (June 2006).[15] Other issues featuring Sacred Cow Barbecues
are: 183 (July 2008),[16] 211 (November 2010),[17] and 261 (January
2015).[18] *Sacred Cow Barbecues* articles are considered controversial
among those gamers who are not amused by their favorite games being
mocked.[19]

In August 2019, after months of declining financials for GameStop, about
half of the current *Game Informer* staff were let go, part of the
larger cut of more than 120 jobs by GameStop as part of the store's
effort to improve their financial performance. These included some staff
members that had been working at *Game Informer* for over 10 years, some
were out on vacation during the time of the layoff. As a result of the
layoff, other *Game Informer* staff also left of their own will,
including video editor Ben Hanson. Ben Hanson eventually started his own
podcast called [MinnMax](MinnMax "wikilink"), in the process recruiting
some of the *Game Informer* staff that was laid off.[20] In March 2020
there was again another set of layoffs at *Game Informer*, this time not
affecting editors but instead people who worked in other departments of
*Game Informer*.[21]

In late June 2020, longtime editor-in-chief and founder Andy McNamara
announced he was leaving *Game Informer*, to be the Global Director of
Integrated Comms for Shooters & Star Wars at Electronic Arts, and that
former senior editor Andrew Reiner would be taking his place as
editor-in-chief. McNamara, who had at the time stopped reviewing games
for *Game Informer*, instead focused solely on writing stories and
behind the scenes work, came back to give his final review, *[The Last
of Us Part II](The_Last_of_Us_Part_II "wikilink")*. After leaving *Game
Informer*, he eventually said that the layoffs had a big impact on his
decision to move on.[22]

On November 4, 2021, the official website announced that every issue
from then on would have a small print run variant known as Game Informer
Gold. This version uses high quality paper and an alternate cover and is
limited to 50 copies. The first copy was given away on November 6 for
their Extra Life charity livestream.[23]

In the summer of 2022, three more *Game Informer* staff were laid off:
John Carson, Wesley LeBlanc, and Creative Director Jeff Akervik, who had
worked at the publication for over 14 years.[24] Andrew Reiner left
*Game Informer* in September 2022 to become a game developer, thus
leaving *Game Informer* with no original staff. Matt Miller, who has
worked at *Game Informer* since 2004, was promoted to editor-in-chief.
In Fall 2022, Kyle Hilliard (who was previously laid off) returned.[25]

*Game Informer* launched a new print magazine subscription, standalone
from GameStop's Power Up Rewards, in March 2024. The program, which
launched at a special annual price of $19.91 (commemorating the
company's founding year), offers 10 print issues per year and digital
magazine access. [26]

### Website

*Game Informer Online* was originally launched in August 1996 and
featured daily news updates as well as articles. Justin Leeper and
Matthew Kato were hired on in November 1999 as full-time web editors. As
part of the GameStop purchase of the magazine, this original
GameInformer.com site was closed around January 2001.[27] Both Leeper
and Kato were eventually placed on the editorial staff of the magazine.

*GI Online* was revived, at the same domain name, in September 2003,
with a full redesign and many additional features, such as a review
database, frequent news updates, and exclusive "Unlimited" content for
subscribers. It was managed by Billy Berghammer, creator of
PlanetGameCube.com (now known as NintendoWorldReport.com).[28]
Berghammer is currently the editor-in-chief at EGM Media Group [29]

In March 2009, the online staff began creating the code for what would
be the latest redesign to date. The redesign was to release hand-in-hand
with the magazine's own redesign. On October 1, 2009, the newly
redesigned website was live, with a welcome message from Editor-In-Chief
Andy McNamara. Many new features were introduced, including a rebuilt
media player, a feed highlighting the site activity of the website's
users, and the ability to create user reviews.[30] At the same time, the
magazine's podcast, *The Game Informer Show*, was launched.[31]

Each year, in January or February, *Game Informer*'s editors count and
judge the "Top 50 Games of \[last year\]". The games are sorted in order
of release date. They do not have rankings, but they do commemorate
special games with awards like Game of the Year and other examples. They
also have top ten charts of differing categories, both in the "Top 50"
section of the website and in the regular magazine.

In August each year, *Game Informer* includes an "E3 Hot 50", a special
section that reviews the year's [E3](E3 "wikilink") (Electronic
Entertainment Expo) and most to all of its games, which also temporarily
replaces the "Previews" section of the print edition.

### Australian edition

In November 2009, *Game Informer* was launched in Australia by former
Australian *GamePro*, *Gameplayer* and *[Official PlayStation
Magazine](Official_PlayStation_Magazine_(Australia) "wikilink")* editor
Chris Stead and publisher Citrus Media.[32] By June 2010, *Game Informer
Australia* had become the first local games publication to pass 10,000
subscribers. By August 18, 2010, it had become Australia's
biggest-selling video games publication.[33]

*Game Informer Australia* was closed down on April 18, 2019, as a result
of cost-cutting measures from its publishing company [EB Games
Australia](EB_Games_Australia "wikilink").[34]

*GI Australia* editor David Milner noted on Twitter that despite the
fact that "readership was up 19% over the last year", that "Recent ad
sales, however, did not really reflect this"; he also noted the failed
attempt at EB Games Australia's corporate parent GameStop to find a
buyer after months on the market, causing their shares to drop.[35]

## Reviews

*Game Informer* reviews games on [PCs](Personal_computer "wikilink");
consoles including [PlayStation 5](PlayStation_5 "wikilink"),
[PlayStation 4](PlayStation_4 "wikilink"), [PlayStation
VR](PlayStation_VR "wikilink"), [Xbox Series
X](Xbox_Series_X "wikilink"), [Xbox One](Xbox_One "wikilink") and
[Nintendo Switch](Nintendo_Switch "wikilink"); and mobile devices
running [Android](Android_(operating_system) "wikilink") and
[iOS](iOS "wikilink").[36] *Game Informer* used to give separate reviews
of the same game for each console for which that game was released;
starting in the mid-2000s, *GI* has published just one consolidated
review for the game, while provides notes on the and of each version.
Older games, three per issue, were given brief reviews in the magazine's
"Classic GI" section (compared with the game's original review score, if
one exists). This was discontinued in 2009, months before the redesign
of the magazine. The magazine's staff rate games on a scale of 1 to 10
with quarter-point intervals. A score of 1 to 5 is considered terrible
(in many issues, 1 is noted as a joke reason for the score, for
instance, "Duplicates in lootboxes" in issue 295);[37] 6 to 7 is
"average", a decently playable, and sometimes fun (but flawed) game; and
10 is a rare, "outstanding", nearly perfect game.[38]