# Gibson Les Paul Studio

The **Gibson Les Paul Studio** is a [solid body](solid_body "wikilink")
[electric guitar](electric_guitar "wikilink") produced by the [Gibson
Guitar Corporation](Gibson_Guitar_Corporation "wikilink") since 1983. It
is a model of [Les Paul](Les_Paul_(guitar) "wikilink") with some
features omitted to appeal to musicians looking for the tonal qualities
of the guitar but with less of an emphasis on cosmetics and to reduce
the price of the instrument.

## History

Responding to a gap in their model lineup for a lower-priced Les Paul in
1983, Gibson introduced the Studio model. The Studio was designed to
attract guitar players who desired traditional Les Paul sound without
having to pay for cosmetic features of upscale models. In order to
produce a lower-cost Les Paul, features such as body binding, neck
binding, and headstock [inlays](inlays "wikilink") were not
available. Additionally, the body was ⅛ to ¼ inch thinner than a
standard Les Paul. Initially made of alder from 1983–1985, Gibson moved
back to maple top/mahogany body combination after the alder body proved
prone to lacquer problems. The name "Studio" comes from the idea that
this model would be sonically indistinguishable from a Les Paul Standard
or Custom in the recording studio, and that the flashier guitars would
be reserved for stage use.

## Models and variations

### Studio Standard

The Studio Standard was produced from 1983–1987 and was very similar to
the Studio Custom, including the "dot" inlays, but had a single-ply
binding around the body and neck, chrome hardware, and white pickup
rings and pick guard. It was also available in different colors, such as
Cherry Sunburst, Tobacco Burst and Ferrari Red. One piece mahogany back,
three piece maple or alder top, maple neck, ebony or rosewood fretboard
rounded out the complements. This was the Tim Shaw era of pickups.

### Studio Custom

The Studio Custom was produced in 1983–1985. It was introduced before
the design of the Studio was finalized, and mostly had the features of a
Standard with a variety of features mixed in from other models. It had a
mahogany neck and mahogany body with a maple top, single-ply binding
around the neck and three-ply binding around the top of the body only,
and gold hardware with black pickup rings and pick guard. The 1984
models had two-piece tops, while 1985 models had three-piece tops. The
fingerboard was made from rosewood on some models, ebony on others, and
had mother of pearl dots for inlays, instead of the usual trapezoids.
The neck profile was slim-tapered, like a Standard, and the frets were
low, like a "Fretless Wonder" Custom. Some of these had Tim Shaw
pickups.

### Vintage Mahogany/Faded

The Vintage Mahogany model has a carved mahogany body, top and neck, a
rosewood fretboard and Alnico V BurstBucker Pro humbucker pickups, the
same humbuckers used in the Les Paul Standard model. The model is
available in "worn brown" and "worn cherry" finishes, featuring a
"satin" nitrocellulose finish.

In 2009, the Vintage Mahogany was renamed the Les Paul Studio Faded.
These models (adding worn blue and worn ebony as color choices, as well
as "satin" fireburst and yellow) featured the carved maple top of other
Les Paul models. In 2013 model year, the Studio Faded was replaced with
the "LPJ" model.

### Studio Lite

In the mid 1990s Gibson produced the Studio Lite and Studio Lite M-III.
The Lite models were produced with balsa wood (referred to as "chromyte"
in advertisements) portions of the body to reduce the guitar's
weight, responding to some players' complaints about the heaviness of a
standard Les Paul after several hours of playing. The Studio Lite M-III
was produced with a new pickup configuration: two humbuckers with a
single coil in the middle. The pickup selector switch gave five
single-coil options in the "up" position, and four humbucker
combinations in the "down" position, plus an "off" position. The name
M-III refers to the Gibson M-III model, which was a
[Superstrat](Superstrat "wikilink")-style guitar, for which these
electronics were originally developed.

### Gem Series

The Gem Series (1996–1998) had [P-90](P-90 "wikilink") pickups and
special finishes in "gemstone" colors: [Amethyst](Amethyst "wikilink"),
[Sapphire](Sapphire "wikilink"), [Topaz](Topaz "wikilink"),
[Emerald](Emerald "wikilink"), and [Ruby](Ruby "wikilink").

Gibson produced a small number of Les Paul Studio guitars using the
leftover paint from the Gem Series. These were produced with dot inlays,
gold or nickel hardware, and gold or nickel Grover tuners. They are rare
and highly sought after. However, these are not to be considered
original Gems, as they did not include the special P-90 pickups.

### SmartWood series

The SmartWood series consists
chronologically of three models; the Exotic, the Studio and the Swamp
Ash models. The SmartWood series is certified environmentally
"responsible" by the [Rainforest
Alliance](Rainforest_Alliance "wikilink") via their SmartWood program.
Gibson is independently audited on an annual basis by the Rainforest
Alliance to ensure that only FSC-certified wood is used in the
construction of Gibson's SmartWood line of instruments.

#### SmartWood Exotic

The SmartWood Exotic line (1996–2002), which was composed of six models.
The SmartWood line featured tops made from different woods:
[Curupay](Curupay "wikilink") has a deep chocolate-walnut richness;
[Peroba](Peroba "wikilink") recalls the orangey hue of the old pine
ceiling beam; [Banara](Banara "wikilink") has a golden, banana-like
glow; [Ambay Guasu](Ambay_Guasu "wikilink") boasts the even lightness of
maple; [Taperyva Guasu](Taperyva_Guasu "wikilink") is reminiscent of a
sun-bleached rosewood, and [Chancharana](Chancharana "wikilink") is a
deep, warm-brown russet. The fretboards are all made from "Curupay"
harvested from forests certified in accordance with the rules of the
[Forest Stewardship Council](Forest_Stewardship_Council "wikilink")
(**FSC**). The mahogany used in the construction of this model is from
similarly certified forests. The SmartWood Exotic had a thinner, belly
contoured, body than the Studio (somewhat similar to that of the Les
Paul Custom Lite), and had "smart wood" written on the truss rod
cover.

#### Studio SmartWood

The Studio SmartWood (LPEXMUGH1) was constructed from wood certified by
the [Rainforest Alliance](Rainforest_Alliance "wikilink"). While the
back and the neck are made from the usual mahogany, the carved top is
made from [Muiricatiara](Astronium_lecointei "wikilink"), along with a
Preciosa rosewood fingerboard. It was in production from December
2002 until 2008 and had a standard body, no pick-guard, gold hardware,
dot-type fret markers, [mother of pearl](nacre "wikilink") Gibson
headstock logo, and a unique metallic green-leaf within the truss rod
cover.

#### Studio Swamp Ash

The Studio Swamp Ash (LPSANSCH1) was manufactured between 2003 and
2011. Built in [Nashville,
Tennessee](Nashville,_Tennessee "wikilink"), its body is made of a
carved [swamp ash](Fraxinus_pennsylvanica "wikilink") top over a
multi-piece swamp ash back. The neck is made from mahogany and is
["set"](Set-in_neck "wikilink") into the body. The fretboard may be
either ebony, granadillol or rosewood, depending on production year. It
has a standard body, no pick-guard, chrome plated hardware, and dot-type
fret markers, a silkscreen Gibson headstock logo and the usual studio
truss rod cover.

### Gothic

During 2000–2002, Gibson released a series of six guitars dubbed
"Gothic" models. Guitars other than the Les Paul Studio in this series
were the [Gibson SG](Gibson_SG "wikilink"), [Flying
V](Flying_V "wikilink"), [X-plorer](X-plorer "wikilink") and Nikki Sixx
Blackbird Bass.

### Voodoo

The "Voodoo" series followed which included an
[SG](Gibson_SG "wikilink") as well as Les Paul Studio. The series was
discontinued in 2005 due to low sales.

### Pro Plus

The Studio Pro Plus was an upgraded studio with a AA figured maple top
and gold hardware. Traditional mahogany body and set SlimTaper™ neck
profile, rosewood fingerboard with acrylic trapezoid inlays, 490R neck
pickup and BurstBucker Pro bridge pickup, TonePros® Tune-o-matic bridge
and stopbar tailpiece, Grover™ tuners with vintage style green keys.
Available in Desert Burst (DB), Trans Black (BL, 2004–05), or Trans Red
(TR, disc. 2003) finish. Made from 2001–2005.

### Premium Plus

The Studio Premium Plus was an upgraded studio with a high-gloss AAA
flamed maple top and gold hardware. Traditional mahogany body and set
'59 Les Paul rounded mahogany neck, pearloid trapezoid inlays and 490R
and 498T alnico magnet humbuckers. Made from 2006–2008. The 2006 was
heavier at 8.5 lbs and had a beige pickguard and truss rod cover with
gold "Studio" lettering. The chambered 2007–2008 models weighed in at
7.5 lbs and came with a black pickguard and cover with white lettering.
Available in Natural (2006–08), Root Beer (2006–07), Trans Amber
(2006–07), Trans Black (2006–07), or Trans Red (2006–07) finish.

### Robot Limited

The Robot Les Paul Studio Limited was an upgraded studio with Powertune
auto-tuning system. A Limited Edition finish Blue Silverburst was
initially released in late 2007 with chrome truss rod cover with "Robot
Guitar" engraved (late 2007 only). The production version (v2,
2008–2011) featured a chambered mahogany body, maple top, set mahogany
neck, 22-fret rosewood-bound (standard finishes) or white-bound
(metallic finishes) ebony fingerboard with figured acrylic trapezoid
inlays, white-bound headstock with MOP Gibson logo and flowerpot inlay
(metallic finishes) or unbound headstock with screened logo (standard
finishes), three-per-side robotic Powerhead Locking tuners, tune-o-matic
Powertune bridge, Powertune stop tailpiece, two chrome covered humbucker
pickups (490R, 498T), four knobs (three normal, and one Master Control
Knob that controls the robotic actions of the guitar), three-way pickup
switch, Neutrik jack on side of guitar, chrome hardware. It was
available in standard finishes: Ebony, Desertburst, Fireburst, Manhattan
Midnight, Wine Red, and metallic finishes: Green Metallic, Purple
Metallic, Red Metallic. Version 2 made from 2008–2011.