# Horse surfing

**Horse surfing** is an [extreme sport](extreme_sport "wikilink")[1]
invented in 2004. It requires two people, a [horse](horse "wikilink"),
and a board. Horse surfing involves one person riding either
[kite-board](Kiteboarding "wikilink"),
[surfboard](surfboard "wikilink"),
[wake-board](Wakeboarding "wikilink"), or
[skim-board](Skiboarding "wikilink"),[2] while being towed behind a
horse, ridden by a second person, through shallow water, at speeds up to
.[3] After originating in [England](England "wikilink") the first
official horse surfing competition was held in 2006 in [La Baule,
France](La_Baule-Escoublac "wikilink"), and over the last 14 years the
sport has continued to spread internationally.[4] Today there are
several competitions with globally established rules and categories.[5]

## History

Horse surfing, a modification of horse boarding, originated in 2005 in
Cornwall, England.[6] It was the product of innovation when Daniel
Fowler-Prime, the creator of horse boarding, was commissioned for a
'beach trick horse riding' photoshoot.[7] Fowler-Prime forgot to bring a
mountain board, his board of choice for horse boarding, to the
photoshoot, so he asked local surf shop manager Matt Smith to bring a
mountain and wake board to the photoshoot. Smith agreed and horse
surfing was first attempted.[8][9] The popularity of horse surfing has
continued to grow ever since.[10] The first horse surfing competition
was held in 2006, one year after the sports invention, in La Baule,
France. In 2008 the first horse-surfing and horse-boarding drag race was
held and the number of competitions has grown ever since with, as of
2020, competitions having been held in Dubai, Australia, Taiwan and the
USA.[11]

## Competitions

Horse surfing competitions include multiple rides across four different
horse surfing disciplines. The competition winner is determined by the
total of points accrued over the four events.[12]

### Competition area

The competition area requires a 300m stretch of shallow waterfront,
which is divided into two main subareas: (1) the preparation and start
zone sub-areas – these areas are designed to give the team a space to
connect the horse and rider via the rope and for the horse to take the
rope tension so the rider is able to stand[13] and (2) the main course
area – this area cannot exceed 250m, but it can be made shorter by
moving the finish post closer to the start post where required.[14]

An exact breakdown of the course is as follows:

*Pre-competition area*

\- Preparation zone - 10m

\- Start zone - 10m

*Start Post- competition area*

\- The course - maximum length 250m

*Finish Post - post competition area*

\- Run off area - 30m

### Personnel

A horse surfing team is made up of four people and one horse. The two
main competitors are the horse rider and the surfer, while the other two
team members, the dinghy man and the rope man, are responsible for
getting the surfer in place prior to being connected to the horse and
connecting the horse to the surfer via the tow rope.[15]

### Rules and regulations

There are several rules that have been standardised across all official
horse surfing competitions:

-   It is at the discretion of the team if they wish to complete the
    course right to left or left to right.[16]
-   While conditions are comparable for all riders. The decision of the
    chief judge or event managers' decision is final and cannot be
    contested. While the contest will continue regardless of weather
    conditions, in the event of severe and/or rough weather a
    “severe/rough weather provision” may be issued.[17]
-   If a competitor wants to submit a protest it must be done, within 30
    minutes of the event in question, in writing. Judges will use
    official footage to determine the result of protests; no spectator
    footage will be considered.[18]
-   Re-rides will never be granted is reaction to personal equipment
    fault, however at the judge's decision resides may be allowed in the
    event of unsafe conditions, rope breakage or other extraneous
    circumstances.[19]
-   Disqualification will result if conduct is considered
    unsportsmanlike, this includes the use of vulgar language, tantrums,
    not riding to the best of one's ability, consumption of alcohol
    during the competition, competing under false pretenses, or
    concealing significant injuries or health problems.[20]
-   There is a risk associated with participating in horse surfing, as
    such a competitor must sign a participation contract prior to
    competing, demonstrating they understand the risks associated with
    horse surfing. All medical conditions or significant/relevant
    injuries must be disclosed prior to competing.[21]
-   While a first aid team is required to be present at all times during
    federation-sanctioned competitions, and rescue crafts must be ready
    and waiting in appropriate locations to assist riders who are
    injured during competing, all competitors are still required to wear
    a life vest that will be effective in ensuring the competitor floats
    in the event they become unconscious.[22]

## Equipment

Horse riding is a difficult sport meaning proper equipment is essential
to success.[23] To successfully horse surf there are four key pieces of
equipment.

### Horse

A quiet, beach-trained horse that is fast and fit enough to pull the
rider at speeds of 35-40 miles per hour is required.[24]

### Board

There are several boards that can be used for horse surfing, including;
[wake boards](Wakeboarding "wikilink"), [kite
boards](Kiteboarding "wikilink") or [skim
boards](Skimboarding "wikilink").[25]

#### Wake boards

The most important factor when considering which wake board is
appropriate is the board size to rider ratio, with larger boards having
larger amounts of buoyancy and therefore being better able to support
larger riders.[26] The shape of the board also affects how what sort of
rider it is appropriate for, a single tip board, with one square and one
rounded end, is most appropriate for those who only aim to ride in a
straight-line without performing any tricks, while a double tipped
board, with two rounded edges allows for more maneuverability in the
water, facilitating jumps and tricks. Most wakeboards are made of foam
center wrapped in fiberglass or carbon/graphite.[27]

#### Kite boards

There are several different types of kite boards that are appropriate
for horse surfing, with each having its own advantages and
disadvantages.[28] The most common type of kiteboarding is the twin-tip
kite board. A kite board is similar in shape to a wake board but can
have additional pads and foot straps.[29] Most twin tip models have a
base that curves upwards, channels that direct the water in one
direction, increasing maximum possible speeds, either straight or curved
sides and square or rounded corners.[30] A light wind kite board is the
recommended board for heavier riders due to the large surface area
created by a flatter, wider more rectangular shape. A kite surfboard is
generally used for kite surfers who wish to surf waves and perform
tricks involving a large amount of airtime.[31] A kite surfboard is
generally smaller, thinner and narrower than a classic surf board and
frequently has an epoxy core.[32]

#### Skim boards

As with wake boards, skim boards come in a range of sizes and
thicknesses, each with advantages and disadvantages.[33] Thicker boards
are more buoyant, gliding on top of the water, allowing for easier
balance, while thinner boards are more sensitive to riders' weight
changes, allowing for higher speeds and more intricate trick.[34] The
type of material used to craft the skim board also affects the style in
which it can be ridden, with carbon fiber boards most commonly used by
professionals, foam boards most suited to beginners and wooden boards
being used by inland riders due to their weight.[35]

### Modified saddle and tow rope

A custom made saddle that allows for secure connection of a tow rope, as
well as a tow rope strong enough to withstand the tension of the rider
will be required to horse surf.[36]

## Locations

Horse surfing is possible in any river, lake, or ocean that is shallow
enough for a horse to gallop through while deep enough to allow a rider
to be buoyant enough to surf.[37][38] As horse riding is not permitted
or may require a permit in some areas it is important to check rules and
regulations before choosing a location.[39][40][41] Horse riding on busy
beaches is not recommended as people, balls, surf boards, frisbees,
dogs, and any other moving objects may spook the horse, resulting in a
lack of control and possible injury.[42]

Horses hooves have the potential to do damage to the beach ecosystem.
Riders can minimise this damage by staying away from beach dunes,
wildlife sanctuary zones, turtle nesting sites and not riding through
flocks of birds or near marine life.[43][44]

For competition training a 300m straight stretch of water and sand will
be necessary. As of the start of 2020, horse-surfing competitions have
been recorded as taking place in Taiwan, Australia, Dubai and the
USA.[45]

## Beach horse riding special considerations

Horse riding at the beach for the first time is a new experience
requiring special training of both the horse and rider.[46] It is
recommended that before horse surfing the horse is well practiced in
beach riding, so it does not to become spooked or anxious.[47][48] To
begin training a horse for horse surfing, it is suggested the first
beach ride be at low-tide, at a quiet uncrowded beach front.[49] Each
horses confidence with entering the water for the first time will be
unique, and it is important for safety of the horse and rider not to
force the horse into the water if they have become agitated to a point
where the rider does not feel comfortable they have enough control to
steer and stop the horse.[50][51] Having a second rider and horse, who
are practiced in beach riding, will help the horse stay calm, and make
the training process safer.[52][53]

Riding on beach sand requires more strength than riding on harder
surfaces such as natural trails or race tracks.[54][55] To reduce the
chance of soft-tissue injury or muscle soreness it is best, while the
horse is building up their beach fitness, to ride the horse along the
firmer sand at the waters edge, take a slower pace, and take rest
breaks.[56][57]

After riding on the beach the horse will need to be properly cleaned to
avoid any damage from the exposure to salt water and sand.[58][59] It is
important to rinse the horse all over with clean fresh water to remove
any salt that might dry out their skin, and carefully check for any
scrapes of cuts.[60][61] Ocean water can contain infectious microbes so
if the horse has been cut or scratched the wounds should be thoroughly
cleaned and treated with [antibiotics](antibiotic "wikilink").[62] Sand
can be very damaging to horse hoof tissue if they are
[unshod](Horseshoe "wikilink"), hooves will need to be careful checked
and cleaned after beach riding to remove all sand. If the horse wears
pads it is recommended a space be cut in the middle of the pad, so that
sand does not build up.[63]

## See also

\* [Dog surfing](Dog_surfing "wikilink") – involves dogs that are
trained to surf on surfboards, bodyboards, skimboards, windsurf boards
or to bodysurf