# Needlepoint

**Needlepoint** is a type of **canvas work,** a form of embroidery in
which [yarn](yarn "wikilink") is stitched through a stiff [open weave
canvas](Even-weave "wikilink"). Traditionally needlepoint designs
completely cover the canvas.[1] Although needlepoint may be worked in a
variety of stitches, many needlepoint designs use only a simple [tent
stitch](tent_stitch "wikilink") and rely upon color changes in the yarn
to construct the pattern. Needlepoint is the oldest form of canvas
work.[2]

The degree of detail in needlepoint depends on the [thread
count](thread_count "wikilink") of the underlying mesh fabric. Due to
the inherent lack of suppleness of needlepoint, common uses include
eyeglass cases, holiday ornaments, pillows, purses, upholstery, and wall
hangings.[3]

## History

The roots of needlepoint go back thousands of years to the ancient
Egyptians, who used small slanted stitches to sew up their canvas tents.
[Howard Carter](Howard_Carter "wikilink"), of
[Tutankhamen](Tutankhamen "wikilink") fame, found some needlepoint in
the cave of a [Pharaoh](Pharaoh "wikilink") who had lived around 1500
BC.[4]

Modern needlepoint descends from the canvas work in [tent
stitch](tent_stitch "wikilink"), done on an evenly woven open ground
fabric that was a popular domestic craft in the 16th century.[5]

Further development of needlepoint was influenced in the 17th century by
[Bargello](Bargello_(needlework) "wikilink")[6] and in the 19th century
by shaded [Berlin wool work](Berlin_wool_work "wikilink") in brightly
colored wool yarn. Upholstered furniture became fashionable in the 17th
century, and this prompted the development of a more durable material to
serve as a foundation for the embroidered works of art. In 18th century
America, needlepoint was used as a preparatory skill to train young
women to sew their own clothing.[7]

## Terminology

When referring to handcrafted textile arts which a speaker is unable to
identify, the appropriate generalized term is
"[needlework](needlework "wikilink")". The first recorded use of the
term needlepoint is in 1869, as a synonym for point-lace.[8] [Mrs
Beeton](Mrs_Beeton "wikilink")'s *Beeton's Book of Needlework* (1870)
does not use the term "needlework", but rather describes "every kind of
stitch which is made upon canvas with wool, silk or beads" as [Berlin
Work](Berlin_wool_work "wikilink") (also spelled Berlinwork). Berlin
Work refers to a subset of needlepoint, popular in the mid-19th Century
that was stitched in brightly colored wool on needlepoint canvas from
hand-colored charts.[9]

"Needlepoint" refers to a particular set of stitching techniques worked
upon stiff openwork canvas.[10][11][12] However, "needlepoint" is not
synonymous with all types of embroidery. Because it is stitched on a
fabric that is an open grid, needlepoint is not embellishing a fabric,
as is the case with most other types of embroidery, but literally the
making of a new fabric. It is for this reason that many needlepoint
stitches must be of sturdier construction than other embroidery
stitches.

Needlepoint is often referred to as "tapestry"[13] in the United Kingdom
and sometimes as "canvas work". However, needlepoint—which is stitched
on canvas mesh—differs from true tapestry—which is woven on a vertical
loom. When worked on fine weave canvas in tent stitch, it is also known
as "petit point". Additionally, "needlepoint lace" is also an older term
for [needle lace](needle_lace "wikilink"), an historic lace-making
technique.

## Contemporary techniques

### Materials

The thread used for stitching may be [wool](wool "wikilink"),
[silk](silk "wikilink"), [cotton](cotton "wikilink") or combinations,
such as wool-silk blend. Variety fibers may also be used, such as
metallic cord, metallic braid, [ribbon](ribbon "wikilink"), or
[raffia](raffia "wikilink"). Stitches may be plain, covering just one
thread intersection with a single orientation, or fancy, such as in
[bargello](Bargello_(needlework) "wikilink") or other counted-thread
stitches. Plain stitches, known as [tent
stitches](tent_stitch "wikilink"), may be worked as
[basketweave](tent_stitch "wikilink"),
[continental](tent_stitch "wikilink") or [half
cross](tent_stitch "wikilink"). Basketweave uses the most wool, but does
not distort the rectangular mesh and makes for the best-wearing piece.

Several types of embroidery canvas are available: single thread and
double thread embroidery canvas are open
[even-weave](even-weave "wikilink") meshes, with large spaces or holes
to allow heavy threads to pass through without fraying. Canvas is sized
by mesh sizes, or thread count per inch. Sizes vary from 5 threads per
inch to 24 threads per inch; popular mesh sizes are 10, 12, 14, 18, and
24. The different types of needlepoint canvas available on the market
are interlock, mono, penelope, plastic, and rug.[14]

-   **Interlock Mono Canvas** is more stable than the others and is made
    by twisting two thin threads around each other for the lengthwise
    thread and "locking" them into a single crosswise thread. Interlock
    canvas is generally used for printed canvases. Silk gauze is a form
    of interlock canvas, which is sold in small frames for petit-point
    work. Silk gauze most often comes in 32, 40 or 48 count, although
    some 18 count is available and 64, 128 and other counts are used for
    miniature work.
-   **Mono canvas** comes in the widest variety of colors (especially 18
    mesh) and is [plain woven](plain_weave "wikilink"), with one
    [weft](weft "wikilink") thread going over and under one
    [warp](warp_(weaving) "wikilink") thread. This canvas has the most
    possibilities for manipulation and open canvas. It is used for
    hand-painted canvases as well as counted thread canvaswork.
-   **Penelope canvas** has two threads closely grouped together in both
    warp and weft. Because these threads can be split apart, penelope
    sizes are often expressed with two numbers, such as 10/20.
-   **Plastic canvas** is a stiff canvas that is generally used for
    smaller projects and is sold as "pre-cut pieces" rather than by the
    yard. Plastic canvas is an excellent choice for beginners who want
    to practice different stitches.[15]
-   **Rug** canvas is a mesh of strong cotton threads, twisting two
    threads around each other lengthwise forms the mesh and locking them
    around a crosswise thread made the same way; this cannot be
    separated. Canvases come in different gauges, and rug canvas is 3.3
    mesh and 5 mesh, which is better for more detailed work.

### Frames and hoops

Needlepoint canvas is stretched on a [scroll
frame](embroidery_hoop "wikilink") or tacked onto a rectangular wooden
frame to keep the work taut during stitching. Petit point is sometimes
worked in a small [embroidery hoop](embroidery_hoop "wikilink") rather
than a scroll frame.

### Patterns

Commercial designs for needlepoint may be found in different forms:
hand-painted canvas, printed canvas, trammed canvas, charted canvas, and
free-form.

In hand-painted canvas, the design is painted on the canvas by the
designer, or painted to their specifications by an employee or
contractor. Canvases may be stitch-painted, meaning each thread
intersection is painstakingly painted so that the stitcher has no doubts
about what color is meant to be used at that intersection.
Alternatively, they may be hand-painted, meaning that the canvas is
painted by hand but the stitcher will have to use their judgment about
what colors to use if a thread intersection is not clearly painted.
Hand-painted canvases allow for more creativity with different threads
and unique stitches by not having to pay attention to a separate chart.
In North America this is the most popular form of needlepoint canvas.

Printed canvas is when the design is printed by [silk
screening](silk_screen "wikilink") or computer onto the needlepoint
canvas. Printing the canvas in this means allows for faster creation of
the canvas and thus has a lower price than Hand-Painted Canvas. However,
care must be taken that the canvas is straight before being printed to
ensure that the edges of the design are straight. Designs are typically
less involved due to the limited color palette of this printing method.
The results (and the price) of printed canvas vary extensively. Often
printed canvases come as part of kits, which also dramatically vary in
quality, based on the printing process and the materials used. This form
of canvas is widely available outside North America.

On a trammed canvas the design is professionally stitched onto the
canvas by hand using horizontal stitches of varying lengths of wool of
the appropriate colours. The canvas is usually sold together with the
wool required to stitch the trammed area. The stitcher then uses tent
stitch over the horizontal lines with the trame stitches acting as an
accurate guide as to the colour and number of stitches required. This
technique is particularly suited to designs with a large area of
mono-colour background as such areas do not require tramming, reducing
the cost of the canvas and allowing the stitcher to choose the
background colour themselves. The Portuguese island of
[Madeira](Madeira "wikilink") is the historic centre for the manufacture
of trammed canvases.

Charted canvas designs are available in book or leaflet form. They are
available at book stores and independent needlework stores. Charted
Canvas designs are typically printed in two ways: either in grid form
with each thread intersection being represented with a symbol that shows
what color is meant to be stitched on that intersection, or as a line
drawing where the stitcher is to trace the design onto his canvas and
then fill in those areas with the colors listed. Books typically include
a grouping of designs from a single designer such as [Kaffe
Fassett](Kaffe_Fassett "wikilink") or Candace Bahouth, or may be
centered on a theme such as Christmas or
[Victorian](Victorian_era "wikilink") Needlepoint. Leaflets usually
include one to two designs and are usually printed by the individual
designer.

Free-form needlepoint designs are created by the stitcher. They may be
based around a favorite photograph, stitch, thread color, etc. The
stitcher just starts stitching! Many interesting pieces are created this
way. It allows for the addition of found objects, appliqué,
computer-printed photographs, goldwork, or specialty stitches.

While traditionally needlepoint has been done to create a solid fabric,
more modern needlepoint incorporates colored canvas, a variety of fibers
and beadwork. Different stitching techniques also allow some of the
unstitched, or lightly stitched, canvas to show through, adding an
entirely new dimension to needlepoint work. Some of these techniques
include "shadow" or "light" stitching, [blackwork](blackwork "wikilink")
on canvas, and [pattern darning](darning "wikilink").

Needlepoint continues to evolve as stitchers use new techniques and
threads, and add appliqué or found materials. The line between
needlepoint and other forms of [embroidery](embroidery "wikilink") is
becoming blurred as new stitchers adapt techniques and materials from
other forms of embroidery to needlepoint.

## Famous needlepointers

### Historical and political figures

Royal needlepointers include: [Mary, Queen of
Scots](Mary,_Queen_of_Scots "wikilink"),[16] [Marie
Antoinette](Marie_Antoinette "wikilink"),[17] [Queen Elizabeth
I](Queen_Elizabeth_I "wikilink"), [Princess
Grace](Princess_Grace "wikilink"). In fact, the American Needlepoint
Guild has established a Princess Grace Award (Needlepoint) for
needlepoint completed entirely in [tent
stitch](tent_stitch "wikilink").[18] (This award is not formally
associated with the Princess Grace Foundation which presents the
"Princess Grace Awards".[19])

An American historical figure who was an avid needlepointer is [Martha
Washington](Martha_Washington "wikilink"), the wife of [George
Washington](George_Washington "wikilink").[20]

### Modern celebrities

American football player [Roosevelt "Rosey"
Grier](Rosey_Grier "wikilink") released a book titled *Rosey Grier's
Needlepoint for Men* (1973) that shows Grier stitching and samples of
his work.[21]

Actress [Mary Martin](Mary_Martin "wikilink")'s book *Mary Martin's
Needlepoint* (1969) catalogues her works and provides needlework
tips.[22] The American actress [Sylvia Sidney](Sylvia_Sidney "wikilink")
sold needlepoint kits featuring her designs, and she published two
popular instruction books: *Sylvia Sidney's Needlepoint Book*[23] and
*The Sylvia Sidney Question and Answer Book on Needlepoint*.[24]

The [MTV](MTV "wikilink") documentary *9 Days and 9 Nights with Ed
Sheeran* (2014)[25] revealed that [Taylor
Swift](Taylor_Swift "wikilink") made [Sheeran](Ed_Sheeran "wikilink") a
[Drake](Drake_(musician) "wikilink")-themed needlepoint as a friendship
gesture.[26]

Actress [Loretta Swit](Loretta_Swit "wikilink")'s book, *A Needlepoint
Scrapbook* (1986), includes a design for [Ms.
Pac-Man](Ms._Pac-Man "wikilink").[27]

## Needlepoint stitches

Most commercial needlework kits recommend one of the variants of [tent
stitch](tent_stitch "wikilink"), although Victorian cross stitch and
random long stitch are also used.[28] Authors of books of needlepoint
designs sometimes use a wider range of stitches.[29][30] Historically, a
very wide range of stitches have been used including:

-   

-   [Brick Stitch](Brick_Stitch "wikilink")

-   [(Victorian) Cross Stitch](Cross_stitches "wikilink")

-   [Encroaching Upright Gobelin
    stitch](Encroaching_Upright_Gobelin_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Gobelin stitch](Gobelin_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Hungarian Ground stitch](Hungarian_Ground_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Hungarian point stitch](Hungarian_point_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Mosaic stitch](Mosaic_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Old Florentine stitch](Old_Florentine_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Parisian stitch](Parisian_stitch "wikilink")

-   Long Stitch - A pattern of triangles in double rows used on a single
    canvas.[31]

-   [Cross stitch](Cross-stitch "wikilink")

-   [Smyrna stitch](Smyrna_stitch "wikilink")

-   [Tent stitches](Tent_stitch "wikilink") - Basketweave, Continental
    and Half cross variants

-   Upright cross stitch - This stitch creates an almost crunchy texture
    and can be used on both single and double canvas. [32]

-   [Whipped flower stitch](Whipped_flower_stitch "wikilink")

There are many books that teach readers how to create hundreds, if not
thousands, of stitches. Some were written by famous stitchers, such as
Mary Martin and Sylvia Sydney. However, the most popular and long-lived
is *The Needlepoint Book*[33] by Jo Ippolito Christensen, Simon &
Schuster. First published in 1976 by Prentice-Hall, the widely
distributed text has been continuously in print and was revised in 2015.
Over 425,000 copies have been sold as of 2023. It contains 436 stitches
and 1680 illustrations in 560 pages.

## In popular culture

A needlepoint stitched by [Cullen
Bohannon](Hell_on_Wheels_(TV_series)#Casting "wikilink")'s murdered
wife, Mary, is referred to repeatedly throughout [*Hell on Wheels*
season 1](Hell_on_Wheels_(season_1) "wikilink"). For example, in episode
2, "[Immoral Mathematics](Immoral_Mathematics#Plot "wikilink")"
(November 13, 2011), Bohannon flashes back to seeing Mary stitching the
needlepoint; in episode 3, "[A New Birth of
Freedom](A_New_Birth_of_Freedom "wikilink")"(November 20, 2011),
Bohannon finds a piece of that finished needlework in the personal
effects of the now-deceased foreman, Daniel Johnson (who in the previous
episode had admitted to being part of the Union outfit that raped and
killed Mary); and in episode 4, "[Jamais je ne
t'oublierai](Jamais_Je_Ne_T'oublierai "wikilink")" (November 27, 2011),
the inebriated Bohannon realizes he's lost the needlepoint, and he gets
into a fight with Bolan, when the latter tauntingly reveals that he has
the swatch.

Needlepoint backgrounds were used most famously on the long running game
show, *[Family Feud](Family_Feud "wikilink")* from its premiere with
[Richard Dawson](Richard_Dawson "wikilink") in 1976 to the end of the
[Ray Combs](Ray_Combs "wikilink") era in 1994.


