# Pancreaticoduodenectomy

A **pancreaticoduodenectomy**, also known as a **Whipple procedure**, is
a major surgical operation most often performed to remove
[cancerous](Pancreatic_cancer "wikilink") tumours from the head of the
[pancreas](pancreas "wikilink").[1] It is also used for the treatment of
pancreatic or [duodenal](Duodenum "wikilink") trauma, or chronic
[pancreatitis](pancreatitis "wikilink").[2] Due to the shared blood
supply of organs in the proximal gastrointestinal system, surgical
removal of the head of the pancreas also necessitates removal of the
[duodenum](duodenum "wikilink"), proximal [jejunum](jejunum "wikilink"),
[gallbladder](gallbladder "wikilink"), and, occasionally, part of the
[stomach](stomach "wikilink").[3]

## Anatomy involved in the procedure

The most common technique of a pancreaticoduodenectomy consists of the
[en bloc](wikt:en_bloc "wikilink") removal of the distal segment
(antrum) of the stomach, the first and second portions of the duodenum,
the head of the [pancreas](w:pancreas#Structure "wikilink"), the [common
bile duct](common_bile_duct "wikilink"), and the
[gallbladder](gallbladder "wikilink"). [Lymph
nodes](Lymph_node "wikilink") in the area are often removed during the
operation as well (lymphadenectomy). However, not all lymph nodes are
removed in the most common type of pancreaticoduodenectomy because
studies showed that patients did not benefit from the more extensive
surgery.[4]

At the very beginning of the procedure, after the surgeons have gained
access to the abdomen, the surfaces of the
[peritoneum](peritoneum "wikilink") and the liver are inspected for
disease that has metastasized. This is an important first step as the
presence of active metastatic disease is a contraindication to
performing the operation.

The vascular supply of the pancreas is from the [celiac
artery](celiac_artery "wikilink") via the [superior pancreaticoduodenal
artery](superior_pancreaticoduodenal_artery "wikilink") and the
[superior mesenteric artery](superior_mesenteric_artery "wikilink") from
the [inferior pancreaticoduodenal
artery](inferior_pancreaticoduodenal_artery "wikilink"). There are
additional smaller branches given off by the [right gastric
artery](right_gastric_artery "wikilink") which is also derived from the
[celiac artery](celiac_artery "wikilink"). The reason for the removal of
the duodenum along with the head of the pancreas is that they share the
same arterial blood supply (the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and
inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery). These arteries run through the
head of the pancreas, so that both organs must be removed if the single
blood supply is severed. If only the head of the pancreas was removed it
would compromise blood flow to the duodenum, resulting in tissue
[necrosis](necrosis "wikilink").

While blood supply to the liver is left intact, the [common bile
duct](common_bile_duct "wikilink") is removed. This means that while the
liver remains with a good blood supply the surgeon must make a new
connection to drain bile produced in the liver. This is done at the end
of the surgery. The surgeon will make a new attachment between the
pancreatic duct and the jejunum or stomach. During the surgery a
[cholecystectomy](cholecystectomy "wikilink") is performed to remove the
[gallbladder](gallbladder "wikilink"). This portion is not done en bloc,
as the gallbladder is removed separately.

Relevant nearby anatomy not removed during the procedure include the
major vascular structures in the area: the [portal
vein](portal_vein "wikilink"), the [superior mesenteric
vein](superior_mesenteric_vein "wikilink"), and the [superior mesenteric
artery](superior_mesenteric_artery "wikilink"), the [inferior vena
cava](inferior_vena_cava "wikilink"). These structures are important to
consider in this operation especially if done for resection of a tumor
located in the head of the pancreas. If the tumor encases (wraps around
50% or more of the vessel) the celiac artery, superior mesenteric
artery, or inferior vena cava it is considered unresectable due to the
lack of patient benefit from the operation while having very high
risk.[5][6] Occasionally a portion of the superior mesenteric vein or
portal vein is attached or inseparable from the tumor. In this setting
[vascular surgeons](vascular_surgeons "wikilink") resect the involved
portion of the vessel, and the vessel is repaired either via end-to-end
anastomosis, repair of the side wall of the vein, or a [vein
graft](Graft_(surgery) "wikilink").

## Medical indications

Pancreaticoduodenectomy is most often performed as curative treatment
for [periampullary cancer](periampullary_cancer "wikilink"), which
include cancer of the bile duct, duodenum, ampulla or head of the
pancreas.[7] The shared blood supply of the pancreas, duodenum and
common bile duct necessitates en bloc resection of these multiple
structures. Other indications for pancreaticoduodenectomy include
[chronic pancreatitis](chronic_pancreatitis "wikilink"), [benign tumors
of the pancreas](Pancreatic_tumor "wikilink"), cancer
[metastatic](Metastasis "wikilink") to the pancreas, multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1[8] and [gastrointestinal stromal
tumors](gastrointestinal_stromal_tumor "wikilink").[9]

### Pancreatic cancer

Pancreaticoduodenectomy is the only potentially curative intervention
for [malignant tumors of the
pancreas](Pancreatic_cancer "wikilink").[10] However, the majority of
patients with pancreatic cancer present with
[metastatic](Metastasis "wikilink") or locally advanced un-resectable
disease;[11] thus only 15â€“20% of patients are candidates for the Whipple
procedure. Surgery may follow [neoadjuvant
chemotherapy](neoadjuvant_chemotherapy "wikilink"), which aims to shrink
the tumor and increasing the likelihood of complete resection.[12]
Post-operative death and complications associated with
pancreaticoduodenectomy have become less common, with rates of
post-operative mortality falling from 30 to 10% in the 1980s to less
than 5% in the 2000s.[13]

### Ampullary cancer

Ampullary cancer arises from the lining of the ampulla of Vater.[14]

### Duodenal cancer

Duodenal cancer arises from the lining of the duodenal mucosa. Majority
of duodenal cancers originate in the second part of the duodenum, where
ampulla is located.[15]

### Cholangiocarcinoma

[Cholangiocarcinoma](Cholangiocarcinoma "wikilink"), or cancer of the
[bile duct](bile_duct "wikilink"), is an indication for the Whipple
procedure when the cancer is present in the distal biliary system,
usually the common bile duct that drains into the duodenum. Depending on
the location and extension of the cholangiocarcinoma, curative surgical
resection may require [hepatectomy](hepatectomy "wikilink"), or removal
of part of the liver, with or without pancreaticoduodenectomy.[16]

### Chronic pancreatitis

Treatment of [chronic pancreatitis](chronic_pancreatitis "wikilink")
typically includes pain control and management of [exocrine
insufficiency](Exocrine_pancreatic_insufficiency "wikilink").
Intractable abdominal pain is the main surgical indication for surgical
management of chronic pancreatitis.[17] Removal of the head of the
pancreas can relieve pancreatic duct obstruction associated with chronic
pancreatitis.[18]

### Trauma

Damage to the pancreas and duodenum from [blunt abdominal
trauma](blunt_abdominal_trauma "wikilink") is uncommon. In rare cases
when this pattern of trauma has been reported, it has been seen as a
result of a lap belt in motor vehicle accidents.[19]
Pancreaticoduodenectomy has been performed when abdominal trauma has
resulted in bleeding around the pancreas and duodenum, damage to the
common bile duct, pancreatic leakage, or transection of the
duodenum.[20] Due to the rarity of this procedure in the setting of
trauma, there is not robust evidence regarding post-operative outcomes.

## Contraindications

Absolute contraindications for the procedure are metastatic disease in
the abdominal cavity or nearby organs. These are found most often on the
peritoneum, in the liver, and in the omentum. In order to determine if
there are metastases, surgeons will inspect the abdomen at the beginning
of the procedure after gaining access. Alternatively, they may perform a
separate procedure called a diagnostic
[laparoscopy](laparoscopy "wikilink") which involves insertion of a
small camera through a small incision to look inside the abdomen. This
may spare the patient the large abdominal incision that would occur if
they were to undergo the initial part of a pancreaticoduodenectomy that
was cancelled due to metastatic disease.[21]

Further contraindications include encasement of major vessels (such as
celiac artery, inferior vena cava, or superior mesenteric artery) as
mentioned above.

## Surgical considerations

### Pylorus-sparing pancreaticoduodenectomy

Clinical trials have failed to demonstrate significant survival benefits
of [total pancreatectomy](total_pancreatectomy "wikilink"), mostly
because patients who submit to this operation tend to develop a
particularly severe form of [diabetes
mellitus](diabetes_mellitus "wikilink") called [brittle
diabetes](brittle_diabetes "wikilink"). Sometimes the
pancreaticojejunostomy may not hold properly after the completion of the
operation and infection may spread inside the patient. This may lead to
another operation shortly thereafter in which the remainder of the
pancreas (and sometimes the [spleen](spleen "wikilink")) is removed to
prevent further spread of infection and possible
[morbidity](Disease#Morbidity "wikilink"). In recent years the
pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (also known as
Traverso-Longmire procedure/PPPD) has been gaining popularity,
especially among European surgeons. The main advantage of this technique
is that the [pylorus](pylorus "wikilink"), and thus normal gastric
emptying, should in theory be preserved.[22] There is conflicting data
as to whether pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy is associated
with increased likelihood of gastric emptying.[23][24] In practice, it
shows similar long-term survival as a Whipple's
(pancreaticoduodenectomy + hemigastrectomy), but patients benefit from
improved recovery of weight after a PPPD, so this should be performed
when the tumour does not involve the stomach and the lymph nodes along
the gastric curvatures are not enlarged.[25]

Compared to the standard Whipple procedure, the pylorus preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy technique is associated with shorter operation
time and less intraoperative blood loss, requiring less blood
transfusion. Post-operative complications, hospital mortality and
survival do not differ between the two methods.[26][27][28]

### Morbidity and mortality

Pancreaticoduodenectomy is considered, by any standard, to be a major
surgical procedure.

Many studies have shown that hospitals where a given operation is
performed more frequently have better overall results (especially in the
case of more complex procedures, such as pancreaticoduodenectomy). A
frequently cited study published in *[The New England Journal of
Medicine](The_New_England_Journal_of_Medicine "wikilink")* found
operative [mortality rates](mortality_rate "wikilink") to be four times
higher (16.3 v. 3.8%) at low-volume (averaging less than one
pancreaticoduodenectomy per year) hospitals than at high-volume (16 or
more per year) hospitals. Even at high-volume hospitals, morbidity has
been found to vary by a factor of almost four depending on the number of
times the surgeon has previously performed the procedure.[29] de Wilde
et al. have reported statistically significant mortality reductions
concurrent with centralization of the procedure in the Netherlands.[30]

One study reported actual risk to be 2.4 times greater than the risk
reported in the medical literature, with additional variation by type of
institution.[31]

### Postoperative complications

Three of the most common post-operative complications are delayed
gastric emptying, bile leak, and pancreatic leak. Delayed gastric
emptying, normally defined as an inability to tolerate a regular diet by
the end of the first post-op week and the requirement for nasogastric
tube placement, occurs in approximately 17% of operations.[32][33]
During the surgery, a new biliary connection (normally a
choledochal-jejunal anastamosis connecting the common bile duct and
jejunum) is made. This new connection may leak in 1-2% of operations. As
this complication is fairly common, it is normal in this procedure for
the surgeon to leave a drain in place at the end.[34] This allows for
detection of a bile leak via elevated bilirubin in the fluid drained.
Pancreatic leak or pancreatic fistula, defined as fluid drained after
postoperative day 3 that has an [amylase](amylase "wikilink") content
greater than or equal to 3 times the upper limit of normal, occurs in
5-10% of operations,[35][36] although changes in the definition of
fistula may now include a much larger proportion of patients (upwards of
40%).[37]

## Recovery after surgery

Immediately after surgery, patients are monitored for return of bowel
function and appropriate closed-suction drainage of the abdomen.

### Return of bowel function

[Ileus](Ileus "wikilink"), which refers to functional obstruction or
[aperistalsis](Peristalsis "wikilink") of the intestine, is a
physiologic response to abdominal surgery, including the Whipple
procedure.[38] While post-operative ileus is typically self-limited,
prolonged post-operative ileus occurs when patients develop nausea,
abdominal distention, pain or intolerance of food by mouth.[39] Various
measures are taken in the immediate post-operative period to minimize
prolonged post-operative ileus. A [nasogastric
tube](Nasogastric_intubation "wikilink") is typically maintained to
suction, to drain gastric and intestinal contents. Ambulation is
encouraged to stimulate return of bowel function. Use of [opioid
medications](Opioid "wikilink"), which interfere with intestinal
motility, is limited.[40]

## History

This procedure was originally described by [Alessandro
Codivilla](Alessandro_Codivilla "wikilink"), an Italian surgeon, in
1898.[41] The first resection for a
[periampullary](Ampulla_of_Vater "wikilink") cancer was performed by the
German surgeon [Walther Kausch](Walther_Kausch "wikilink") in 1909 and
described by him in 1912. It is often called *Whipple's procedure* or
the *Whipple procedure*, after the American surgeon [Allen
Whipple](Allen_Whipple "wikilink") who devised an improved version of
the surgery in 1935 while at [Columbia-Presbyterian Medical
Center](NewYorkâ€“Presbyterian_Hospital "wikilink") in New York[42] and
subsequently came up with multiple refinements to his technique.

## Nomenclature

Fingerhut et al. argue that while the terms *pancreatoduodenectomy* and
*pancreaticoduodenectomy* are often used interchangeably in the medical
literature, scrutinizing their etymology yields different definitions
for the two terms.[43] As a result, the authors prefer
*pancreatoduodenectomy* over *pancreaticoduodenectomy* for the name of
this procedure, as strictly speaking *pancreaticoduodenectomy* should
refer to the resection of the duodenum and pancreatic duct rather than
the pancreas itself.[44]

## See also

-   [List of surgeries by type](List_of_surgeries_by_type "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Toronto Whipple Clinical Pathway Education App - Open access App
    for patient and caregiver education](http://whipplepathway.ca)
-   [The Toronto Video Atlas of Liver, Pancreas and Transplant Surgery â€“
    Video of Whipple
    procedure](http://pie.med.utoronto.ca/tvasurg/TVASurg_content/surg/PP_whipple.html)
-   [The Toronto Video Atlas of Liver, Pancreas and Transplant Surgery
    Patient Education Module â€“ Patient and Family Education video for
    the Whipple
    procedure](http://pie.med.utoronto.ca/tvasurg_pe/TVASurg_PE_content/pancreas_whipple.html)
-   ["Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy: a historical comment Adrian
    O'Sullivan"](https://web.archive.org/web/20110711123235/http://www.grandrounds-e-med.com/articles/gr07L0001.html)
    â€“ The original description of Whipple's operation together with a
    modern commentary