# Poison ivy

**Poison ivy** is a type of allergenic plant in the genus
*[Toxicodendron](Toxicodendron "wikilink")* native to Asia and North
America. Formerly considered a single species, *Toxicodendron radicans*,
poison ivies are now generally treated as a complex of three separate
species: *[Toxicodendron radicans](Toxicodendron_radicans "wikilink")*,
*[Toxicodendron rydbergii](Toxicodendron_rydbergii "wikilink")*, and
*[Toxicodendron orientale](Toxicodendron_orientale "wikilink")*. They
are well known for causing [urushiol-induced contact
dermatitis](urushiol-induced_contact_dermatitis "wikilink"), an itchy,
irritating, and sometimes painful rash, in most people who touch them.
The rash is caused by [urushiol](urushiol "wikilink"), a clear liquid
compound in the plant's [sap](sap "wikilink"). They are variable in
appearance and habit, and despite its common name, it is not a "true"
[ivy (*Hedera*)](Hedera "wikilink"), but rather a member of the
[cashew](cashew "wikilink") and [pistachio](pistachio "wikilink") family
([Anacardiaceae](Anacardiaceae "wikilink")). *T. radicans* is commonly
eaten by many animals, and the seeds are consumed by birds, but poison
ivy is most often thought of as an unwelcome [weed](weed "wikilink").

## Species

Three species of poison ivy are generally recognised; they are sometimes
considered subspecies of *Toxicodendron radicans*:[1][2][3]

-   *[Toxicodendron orientale](Toxicodendron_orientale "wikilink")*:
    found in East Asia.[4]
-   *[Toxicodendron radicans](Toxicodendron_radicans "wikilink")*: found
    throughout eastern Canada and the United States, Mexico and Central
    America, Bermuda and the Bahamas.[5]
-   *[Toxicodendron rydbergii](Toxicodendron_rydbergii "wikilink")*:
    found throughout Canada and much of the United States except the
    southeast.[6]

## Description

Poison ivies can grow as small plants, shrubs, or climbing vines.[7]
They are commonly characterized by clusters of leaves, each containing
three leaflets,[8] hence the common expression "leaves of three, let it
be".[9] These leaves can vary between an elliptic to egg shape and will
have either smooth, lobed, or toothed [margins](Crenulate "wikilink").
Additionally, the leaf clusters are
[alternate](Alternate_leaf "wikilink") on the stem. Clusters of small,
greenish flowers bloom from May to July and produce white berries in the
fall a few millimeters in diameter.[10]

## Health effects

[thumb|upright=1.3|A video describing the effects of poison ivy on the
body](File:How_Poison_Ivy_Works.webm "wikilink")
[thumb|upright=1.3|[Blisters](Blister "wikilink") from contact with
poison ivy](File:Urushiol_induced_contact_dermatitis.jpg "wikilink")
Urushiol-induced contact dermatitis is the [allergic
reaction](allergy "wikilink") caused by poison ivy. In extreme cases, a
reaction can progress to [anaphylaxis](anaphylaxis "wikilink"). Around
15 to 25 percent of people have no allergic reaction to urushiol, but
most people have a greater reaction with repeated or more concentrated
exposure.[11][12]

Over 350,000 people are affected by urushiol annually in the United
States.[13]

The oozing fluids released by scratching blisters do not spread the
poison. The fluid in the blisters is produced by the body and it is not
urushiol itself.[14] The appearance of a spreading rash indicates that
some areas received more of the poison and reacted sooner than other
areas or that contamination is still occurring from contact with objects
to which the original poison was spread.

Those affected can unknowingly spread the urushiol inside the house, on
phones, door knobs, couches, counters, desks, and so on, thus in fact
repeatedly coming into contact with poison ivy and extending the length
of time of the rash. If this happens, the surfaces should be wiped with
bleach or a commercial urushiol removal agent. The blisters and oozing
result from blood vessels that develop gaps and leak fluid through the
skin; if the skin is cooled, the vessels constrict and leak less.[15] If
plant material with urushiol is burned and the smoke then inhaled, this
rash will appear on the lining of the lungs, causing extreme pain and
possibly fatal respiratory difficulty.[16] If poison ivy is eaten, the
mucus lining of the mouth and digestive tract can be damaged.[17]

Urushiol oil can remain active for several years, so handling dead
leaves or vines can cause a reaction. In addition, oil transferred from
the plant to other objects (such as pet fur) can cause the rash if it
comes into contact with the skin.[18][19] Clothing, tools, and other
objects that have been exposed to oil should be washed to prevent
further reactions.[20]

### Treatment

Immediate washing with soap and cold water or [rubbing
alcohol](rubbing_alcohol "wikilink") may help prevent a reaction.[21]
During a reaction, calamine lotion or
[diphenhydramine](diphenhydramine "wikilink") may help mitigate
symptoms. [Corticosteroids](Corticosteroid "wikilink"), either applied
to the skin or taken by mouth, may be appropriate in extreme cases. An
astringent containing aluminum acetate (such as [Burow's
solution](Burow's_solution "wikilink")) may also provide relief and
soothe the uncomfortable symptoms of the rash.[22]

Urushiol binds to the skin on contact where it causes severe itching
that develops into reddish inflammation or uncoloured bumps, and then
[blistering](blister "wikilink"). These [lesions](lesions "wikilink")
may be treated with [calamine](calamine "wikilink") lotion, [Burow's
solution](Burow's_solution "wikilink") compresses, dedicated commercial
poison ivy itch creams, or baths to relieve discomfort,[23] though
recent studies have shown some traditional medicines to be
ineffective.[24][25] [Over-the-counter](Over-the-counter "wikilink")
products to ease itching—or simply oatmeal baths and [baking
soda](baking_soda "wikilink")—are now recommended by
[dermatologists](dermatologists "wikilink") for the treatment of poison
ivy.[26]

A plant-based remedy cited to counter urushiol-induced contact
dermatitis is [jewelweed](Impatiens "wikilink"), though jewelweed
extracts had no positive effect in clinical studies.[27][28][29][30]
Others argue that prevention of lesions is easy if one practices
effective washing, using plain soap, scrubbing with a washcloth, and
rinsing three times within 2–8 hours of exposure.[31]

The pentadecyl [catechols](catechols "wikilink") of the
[oleoresin](oleoresin "wikilink") within the sap of poison ivy and
related plants causes the allergic reaction; the plants produce a
mixture of pentadecylcatechols, which collectively is called urushiol.
After injury, the sap leaks to the surface of the plant where the
urushiol becomes a blackish [lacquer](lacquer "wikilink") after contact
with oxygen.[32][33]

## Prognosis

Typically, the rash from the urushiol oil lasts about five to twelve
days, but in extreme cases it can last a month or more.[34] A urushiol
rash usually develops within a week of exposure and can last 1–4 weeks,
depending on severity and treatment. In rare cases, urushiol reactions
may require hospitalization.[35]

### Related species

People who are sensitive to urushiol can also experience a similar rash
from [mangoes](mangoes "wikilink"). Mangoes are in the same family
(Anacardiaceae) as poison ivy; the sap of the mango tree and skin of
mangoes has a chemical compound similar to urushiol.[36] A related
allergenic compound is present in the raw shells of
[cashews](cashew "wikilink").[37] Similar reactions have been reported
occasionally from contact with the related fragrant sumac (*[Rhus
aromatica](Rhus_aromatica "wikilink")*) and [Japanese lacquer
tree](Toxicodendron_vernicifluum "wikilink"). These other plants are
also in the family Anacardiaceae.

## Similar allergenic plants

-   *[Gluta](Gluta "wikilink") spp* (rengas tree)
-   *[Lithraea molleoides](Lithraea_molleoides "wikilink")* (*aruera* –
    South America)
-   *[Smodingium argutum](Smodingium_argutum "wikilink")* (African
    poison ivy)
-   *[Toxicodendron pubescens](Toxicodendron_pubescens "wikilink")*
    (poison oak – eastern)
-   *[Toxicodendron
    diversilobum](Toxicodendron_diversilobum "wikilink")* (poison oak –
    western)
-   *[Toxicodendron vernix](Toxicodendron_vernix "wikilink")* (poison
    sumac)