# Prince Leopold Island

**Prince Leopold Island** (, )[1] is an island in the [Qikiqtaaluk
Region](Qikiqtaaluk_Region "wikilink") of [Nunavut](Nunavut "wikilink"),
Canada. It is located in [Lancaster Sound](Lancaster_Sound "wikilink")
at the junction of [Prince Regent Inlet](Prince_Regent_Inlet "wikilink")
and [Barrow Strait](Barrow_Strait "wikilink"). [Somerset
Island](Somerset_Island_(Nunavut) "wikilink") is situated to the
southwest; [Port Leopold](Port_Leopold "wikilink"), an abandoned trading
post, is the closest landmark. The island is significant as a summer
habitat and breeding ground for large populations of several arctic bird
species.

## History

Evidence of Inuit habitation in the form of house pits and bones from
[bowhead whales](bowhead_whale "wikilink") and other marine mammals is
present on the north and southeast spits of the island.[2] The island
and Somerset Island to its south were first sighted by a European on
August 4, 1819, during [William
Parry's](William_Parry_(explorer) "wikilink") 1819 expedition, who named
them Prince Leopold's Isles after then prince
[Leopold](Leopold_I_of_Belgium "wikilink") of
[Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld](Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld "wikilink") (the future King
[Leopold I of Belgium](Leopold_I_of_Belgium "wikilink")).[3]
Ornithological field research began on the island in the 1950s, and an
[Environment Canada](Environment_and_Climate_Change_Canada "wikilink")
research station was established on the island in 1975. Research has
been conducted on the island almost every year since then, for varying
lengths of time during summer. The camp, situated in the southeast of
the island, consists of an airstrip, two small plywood cabins, and two
plywood platform for the erection of temporary structures.[4]

## Geography and Geology

Most of Prince Leopold Island rises steeply from the surrounding sea,
with cliffs rising as high as above sea level surrounding most of the
island. On the east and northeast sides of the island, the drops are
sheer, going directly down to the sea, while around the rest of the
island, there are steep [scree](scree "wikilink") slopes between the
base of the cliffs and the water. The majority of the island's area of
is occupied by a plateau generally ranging in altitude between around
and . The plateau is divided in the east by a gorge that runs
northâ€“south across the width of the island, while smaller steep canyons
skirt the edge of the island and main gorge at various points. Four
gravel [spits](spit_(landform) "wikilink"), in the north, southwest,
south, and southeast of the island, jut out from the coast. During the
summer, surface water on the island is scarce. A few small shallow lakes
exist on the plateau; the largest, Far Lake, is about long, and is
located near the eastern cliffs. There is one [perennial
stream](perennial_stream "wikilink") on the island, which drains the
plateau, including Far Lake, through the main gorge, flowing into the
sea near the southeast spit.[5][6]

The [bedrock](bedrock "wikilink") of the island, which forms the
prominent cliffs, is [horizontally bedded](bed_(geology) "wikilink")
[Silurian](Silurian "wikilink") [limestone](limestone "wikilink") and
[sandstone](sandstone "wikilink").[7] Erosion of the sedimentary rock
has formed crevices and rock ledges on large sections of the cliff
faces, which provides nesting sites for large numbers of breeding
seabirds.[8]

## Ecology

### Conservation

The island is a Canadian [Important Bird
Area](Important_Bird_Area "wikilink") (#NU006), a federally listed
[migratory](Bird_migration "wikilink") [bird
sanctuary](bird_sanctuary "wikilink") since 1995, and a [Key Migratory
Bird Terrestrial Habitat site](Key_Habitat_Site "wikilink") (NU Site
15).[9][10]

### Flora

Vegetation consists of [forbs](forb "wikilink"),
[lichens](lichen "wikilink"), and [mosses](moss "wikilink"), though the
top of the island is mostly devoid of plants. Denser concentrations of
vegetation occur in seepage areas on the spits, including
[sedges](sedge "wikilink") and some [dwarf
willow](dwarf_willow "wikilink"). The most densely covered area of
highland is in the southeast, where some
[saxifrages](saxifrages "wikilink"), mostly the
[purple](Saxifraga_oppositifolia "wikilink") and
[nodding](Saxifraga_cernua "wikilink") species, and [arctic
poppy](arctic_poppy "wikilink") can be found. On the south cliffs too,
growths of [common scurvygrass](Cochlearia "wikilink") and [arctic
mouse-ear](Cerastium_arcticum "wikilink") occur.[11]

### Fauna

Large numbers of arctic seabirds, [thick-billed
murres](thick-billed_murre "wikilink"), [northern
fulmars](northern_fulmar "wikilink"), [black-legged
kittiwakes](black-legged_kittiwake "wikilink"), and [black
guillemots](black_guillemot "wikilink") breed on the cliff ledges,
arriving in the vicinity in May or early June and departing by
mid-September. Intermittent study since the 1970s record regular
habitation by approximately 155,000 mating pairs of various species,
nesting annually on cliff faces around the circumference of the island.
The island is one of the most important locations for breeding marine
birds in the Canadian Arctic, having larger numbers and a greater
diversity of species than any other site in the region. Other birds nest
in smaller numbers: [brant geese](brant_(goose) "wikilink"), [common
eiders](common_eider "wikilink"), [parasitic
jaegers](parasitic_jaeger "wikilink"), [ravens](raven "wikilink") and
[snow bunting](snow_bunting "wikilink"). [Glaucous
gulls](Glaucous_gulls "wikilink"), which regularly predate on the eggs
and sometimes adults of the other species, have similar sized nesting
population, of about 75 pairs.

The surrounding sea-ice around the island breaks up relatively early, in
March or April, and the nearby waters of Lancaster Sound and Barrow
Strait becomes rich with nutrients towards the late spring and early
summer when it thaws, resulting in high [ecological
productivity](Productivity_(ecology) "wikilink"). Abundant plankton
supports fish and crustacean populations, in turn becoming food for
nearby birds and numerous species of marine mammals.
[Beluga](Beluga_whales "wikilink"), and [bowhead
whales](bowhead_whale "wikilink"), [narwhals](narwhal "wikilink"),
[walruses](walrus "wikilink"), and [ringed](ringed_seal "wikilink") and
[bearded seals](bearded_seal "wikilink") roam nearby.

The only resident land mammals are a small population of [northern
collared lemmings](northern_collared_lemming "wikilink"), though visits
by larger mammals - [caribou](peary_caribou "wikilink"),
[hares](arctic_hare "wikilink"), [foxes](arctic_fox "wikilink"), and
[bears](polar_bear "wikilink") - are recorded. [12]


## References

## External links

-   [Prince Leopold
    Island](http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/toporama?center=149469.09020744,2733177.361296&zoom=7)
    in the [Atlas of Canada](Atlas_of_Canada "wikilink") - Toporama;
    Natural Resources Canada

[Category:Uninhabited islands of Qikiqtaaluk
Region](Category:Uninhabited_islands_of_Qikiqtaaluk_Region "wikilink")
[Category:Important Bird Areas of Qikiqtaaluk
Region](Category:Important_Bird_Areas_of_Qikiqtaaluk_Region "wikilink")
[Category:Important Bird Areas of Arctic
islands](Category:Important_Bird_Areas_of_Arctic_islands "wikilink")
[Category:Seabird colonies](Category:Seabird_colonies "wikilink")