# Roller in-line hockey

**Roller in-line hockey**, **American roller hockey** or **inline
hockey**, is a variant of [hockey](hockey "wikilink") played on a hard,
smooth surface, with players using [inline
skates](inline_skates "wikilink") to move and [ice hockey
sticks](ice_hockey_stick "wikilink") to shoot a hard, plastic
[puck](hockey_puck "wikilink") into their opponent's
[goal](goal_(sport) "wikilink") to score points. The sport is a very
fast-paced and free-flowing game and is considered a [contact
sport](contact_sport "wikilink"), but [body
checking](checking_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") is prohibited. There are
five players including the goalkeeper from each team on the rink at a
time, while teams normally consist of 16 players. There are
professional leagues, one of which is the [National Roller Hockey
League](National_Roller_Hockey_League "wikilink") (NRHL). While it is
not a contact sport, there are exceptions, i.e. the NRHL involves
fighting.

Unlike [ice hockey](ice_hockey "wikilink"), there are no blue lines or
defensive zones in roller hockey. This means that, according to most
rule codes, there are no [offsides](Offside_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") or
[icings](icing_(hockey) "wikilink") that can occur during gameplay. This
along with fewer players on the rink allows for faster gameplay. There
are traditionally two 20-minute periods or four 10-minute periods with a
stopped clock.

In the United States, the highest governing body for the sport is [USA
Roller Sports](USA_Roller_Sports "wikilink") (USARS). USARS is credited
with the development of the present-day rules and regulations that is
used throughout multiple tournament series. They organize tournaments
across the United States but they are not the only tournament provider.
Some of the other independent tournament providers include [Amateur
Athletic Union](Amateur_Athletic_Union "wikilink"), [North American
Roller Championships](North_American_Roller_Championships "wikilink"),
and the Torhs 2 Hot 4 Ice tournament series. Internationally, inline
hockey is represented by two different unions, the [World
Skate](World_Skate "wikilink") and the [International Ice Hockey
Federation](International_Ice_Hockey_Federation "wikilink") (IIHF). Each
organizes its own annual [world
championships](world_championships "wikilink").

Due to the [2022 Russian invasion of
Ukraine](2022_Russian_invasion_of_Ukraine "wikilink"), World Skate
banned Russian and Belarusian athletes and officials from its
competitions, and will not stage any events in Russia or Belarus in
2022.

## History

Some of the earliest video evidence of the sport is newsreel
[footage](footage "wikilink") from the *[Giornale
Luce](Giornale_Luce "wikilink")* taken in [Vienna](Vienna "wikilink"),
[Austria](Austria "wikilink") in 1938. The video shows players using
[inline skates](inline_skates "wikilink") with five metal wheels and a
front wheel brake. Each team has four skaters plus a netminder. They are
using [ice hockey](ice_hockey "wikilink") sticks, with taped blades, and
the goals closely resemble ice hockey goals of the wire-mesh type common
in Europe around that time. The game is being played with a ball on a
rectangular outdoor court, which appears to be asphalt.

The exact same footage was used in a newsreel produced by [British
Pathé](British_Pathé "wikilink") in 1938.

### History in North America

In the United States, the [USA Roller
Sports](USA_Roller_Sports "wikilink") (USARS) predecessor organization
was the Roller Skating Rink Operators Association (RSROA). In 1940, the
RSROA published a set of [roller hockey](roller_hockey "wikilink") rules
drawn from a booklet by the [National Hockey
League](National_Hockey_League "wikilink") (NHL) which was designed to
grow interest in playing [hockey](hockey "wikilink") on [roller
skates](roller_skates "wikilink"). However, because of the intervention
of [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), the organization of roller
hockey [tournaments](tournament "wikilink") did not receive significant
development until after this war in the late 1940s. At first skating
club interest was confined to the northern tier of the United States,
including the bordering [Canadian](Canada "wikilink") cities. Puck
roller hockey's spread in popularity during that period was helped along
by the attention of local commercial television, which was getting its
start and in desperate need for events to fill air time. The increased
interest in the sport led in 1959 to the selection of a National Puck
Hockey Committee to formulate special rules for the performance of puck
hockey in the variety of rink sizes available to roller skates. The
American Roller Hockey Association (ARHA) was formed with Joe Spillman,
a roller rink operator from [San
Antonio](San_Antonio,_Texas "wikilink"), [Texas](Texas "wikilink") as
its first Commissioner. Under Spillman's direction, the sport of hockey
on roller skates grew rapidly throughout the United States.

During the 1960 RSROA National Roller Skating Championships held in
[Little Rock](Little_Rock,_Arkansas "wikilink"),
[Arkansas](Arkansas "wikilink"), exhibition games for ball and puck
roller hockey were held. Following these Nationals, the first full
competitive season officially began in North America for roller hockey.
This, of course, had puck roller hockey entirely performed on quad
skates, for at that time there were no [inline
skates](inline_skates "wikilink") available. State and regional
competitions determined the teams that would move on to the North
American Championships.

In 1962, at [Pershing Auditorium](Pershing_Auditorium "wikilink") in
[Lincoln](Lincoln,_Nebraska "wikilink"),
[Nebraska](Nebraska "wikilink"), both ball and puck hockey were part of
the North American Championships. The Arcadia Wildcats from
[Detroit](Detroit,_Michigan "wikilink"),
[Michigan](Michigan "wikilink"), defeated the [Van
Wert](Van_Wert,_Ohio "wikilink") Chiefs 3–1, becoming the first puck
hockey national champions on quad skates. [Inline
skates](Inline_skates "wikilink") were not commercially available during
that era.

On 1 September 1965, during their semi-annual board meeting, the RSROA
installed puck hockey as an equal and separate division of roller
hockey, which included ball hockey, a format most popular in Europe and
South America. It was decided that both ball and puck hockey would
compete under the same rules and award separate gold medal winners. Budd
Van Roekel, RSROA president, was quoted in the January 1965 issue of
*Skate Magazine*,

The 1966 North American Championships marked the return of puck hockey
after a four-year hiatus. The final game was a nail biter and the crowd
appreciated the fast pace and excitement of puck hockey. The final game
was between the Canadians of [Windsor](Windsor,_Ontario "wikilink"),
[Ontario](Ontario "wikilink") and the Wildcats of Detroit, Michigan, the
defending champions from 1962. The score seesawed between the two teams
and was finally decided in favor of the Canadians with a final score of
5 to 3. The win gave the Canadian team their only gold medal for the
whole North American Championships. One Canadian team player was quoted
in the 1966 Fall issue of *Skate Magazine*, "We simply had to win the
(puck) hockey championships, otherwise our fathers wouldn't allow us to
return home." Another milestone occurred for puck roller hockey in 1977,
when the North American Puck Hockey Championship was held in a venue
away from ball hockey for the first time. The 1977 puck championships
were staged in [Houston](Houston "wikilink"), [Texas](Texas "wikilink")
to large crowds and a great amount of publicity, as fourteen newspapers
and television stations covered the event. The year 1977 was also a
milestone for women with this championship marking the debut of a
women's hockey national championship.

#### Transition from quads to inline

The very first inline roller hockey team to earn a USA National
Championship title did so at a USA Roller Sports (USARS) National
Championship held in [San Diego](San_Diego "wikilink") in July 1993. At
the previous 1992 USARS National Championships, also staged in San
Diego, the San Diego Hosers won the Senior Gold Division title wearing
their customary quad roller skates. As of that time, the Hosers
manager/coach Paul Chapey felt that while [inline
skates](inline_skates "wikilink") were obviously faster, the advantage
was to quad skates because of their assumed greater maneuverability.
Some teams and individual players at the 1992 Nationals had been
equipped with inline skates, but perhaps had not yet mastered their new
vehicles. During the ensuing year, Paul Chapey became an inline convert
and the San Diego Hosers came back to the USAC/RS Nationals in 1993
entirely on inline skates and recaptured their national title. This
significant event took place at least a year before all the other major
roller inline hockey organizations were even in existence, including
[National Inline Hockey
Association](National_Inline_Hockey_Association "wikilink") (NIHA), [USA
Hockey InLine](USA_Hockey_InLine "wikilink"), [North American Roller
Hockey
Championships](North_American_Roller_Hockey_Championships "wikilink")
(NARCh) and [American Inline Roller Hockey
Series](American_Inline_Roller_Hockey_Series "wikilink") (AIRHS).

USA Roller Sports, under the auspices of [Fédération Internationale de
Roller Sports](Fédération_Internationale_de_Roller_Sports "wikilink")
(FIRS), established and hosted the first [World Inline Roller Hockey
Championships for
men](FIRS_Senior_Men's_Inline_Hockey_World_Championships "wikilink") at
the [Odeum Arena](Odeum_Expo_Center "wikilink") in [Villa
Park](Villa_Park,_Illinois "wikilink"), [Illinois](Illinois "wikilink")
(a suburb of [Chicago](Chicago "wikilink")) in 1995. USA Roller Sports
established the first Inline Hockey World Championships for Juniors,
again in Chicago in 1996, following the USA National Championships. The
first World Inline Hockey Championships for Women occurred under
sponsorship of USA Roller Sports in
[Rochester](Rochester,_New_York "wikilink"), [New
York](New_York_(state) "wikilink") in 2002. Since the introduction of
these events, FIRS National Federations around the world have annually
perpetuated inline world championships. USA (Ice) Hockey and
[International Ice Hockey
Federation](International_Ice_Hockey_Federation "wikilink") (IIHF) began
their men's [InLine Hockey World
Championship](IIHF_InLine_Hockey_World_Championship "wikilink") in 1996,
after the first such world championship by FIRS and has yet to organize
a women's inline hockey world tournament or one for juniors.

In March 2002, the [United States Olympic
Committee](United_States_Olympic_Committee "wikilink") (USOC) Membership
and Credentials Committee officially reaffirmed that USA Roller Sports
as the governing body for inline hockey in the United States, which
continues to this day. This determination was based on a conclusion by
the USOC that internationally the sport of inline hockey is recognized
as a discipline of roller sports. Then, as now, USA Roller Sports is a
member in good standing of Federation International de Roller Sports
("FIRS"), the international federation for roller sports as recognized
by the International Olympic Committee, and FIRS is also recognized by
the [Pan American Sports
Organization](Pan_American_Sports_Organization "wikilink") (PASO) as the
controlling international federation for inline hockey, a sport of the
[Pan American Games](Pan_American_Games "wikilink").

### History in Europe

For training purposes especially for hockey players, inline skates were
produced in small quantities by several companies which were in fact
modified ice skates, one of them was the "Speedy" by
[SKF](SKF "wikilink") which was available also with hockey-wheels. This
changed when mass-produced inline skates from the USA were available in
the early 1990s. In the mid-1990s first leagues started.

Inline roller hockey was introduced to the [World
Games](World_Games "wikilink") for the first time in 2005, an
[International Olympic
Committee](International_Olympic_Committee "wikilink") (IOC) sanctioned
event under the jurisdiction of the [International World Games
Association](International_World_Games_Association "wikilink") (IWGA),
an affiliate of the [General Association of International Sports
Federations](General_Association_of_International_Sports_Federations "wikilink")
(GAISF). The [United
States](United_States_men's_national_inline_hockey_team "wikilink") won
the gold medal, with
[Canada](Canada_men's_national_inline_hockey_team "wikilink") taking the
Silver and
[Switzerland](Switzerland_men's_national_inline_hockey_team "wikilink")
the bronze medal. Inline roller hockey replaced [rink
hockey](rink_hockey "wikilink") (ball and cane) on the World Games
program for [Duisburg](Duisburg "wikilink"),
[Germany](Germany "wikilink") at the 2005 quadrennial World Games. Rink
roller hockey had been part of the World Games since its first
organization in 1979 at [Santa
Clara](Santa_Clara,_California "wikilink"),
[California](California "wikilink"), as have the other disciplines of
[roller sports](roller_sports "wikilink").

During the General Assembly of the IWGA, which took place in
[Madrid](Madrid "wikilink") on 14 May 2003, the IWGA unanimously agreed
that inline roller hockey was the responsibility of FIRS and that this
variant form of roller hockey would be included on the program of the
2005 World Games in place of the previous format. This same scenario had
previously played out before the Pan American Sports Organization in
1999, when inline hockey made its first appearance at the Pan American
Games in Canada, and repeated again four years later in the [Dominican
Republic](Dominican_Republic "wikilink"). PASO extends continued
recognition of the inline hockey under the jurisdiction of FIRS. (sub to
PAPA H)

Due to the [2022 Russian invasion of
Ukraine](2022_Russian_invasion_of_Ukraine "wikilink"), World Skate
banned Russian and Belarusian athletes and officials from its
competitions, and will not stage any events in Russia or Belarus in
2022.

## Professional inline hockey

[National Roller Hockey
League](National_Roller_Hockey_League "wikilink") is a professional
league, founded in 2014. The NRHL began its inaugural season 20 February
2015. The NRHL games consist of 3 15-minute periods, with 10 minute
intermissions. It differs from professional ice hockey with rules
including no [offsides](Offside_(ice_hockey) "wikilink"), and no icing.
The NRHL permits fighting, with a 5-minute major penalty assessed to the
combatants. The players in the NRHL pay nothing to play, with
compensation opportunities available in the inaugural season. Players
were paid a per game basis in the second season of the NRHL, based on a
win or loss. The players were paid double for a win than a loss. The
Detroit Bordercats won the inaugural Commissioner's Cup. The Bordercats
repeated as Commissioner's Cup champions for the second season. The NRHL
is expanding its role as a professional league in the summer of 2020.
The NRHL will have franchises located throughout the United States
and/or Canada in arenas with a minimum stadium seating capacity of
3,000. The season will operate from May through August.

MLRH (Major League Roller Hockey), is played in the United States and
Europe. It consists of East and West Coast divisions, and the season is
played from October to March with finals being held in either Europe or
the USA. This is the only full check inline league in the world and it
has a $10,000 championship purse. It has similar rules as the NHL, with
some exceptions and only having two 17 min periods and in the "Super"
League, 4 x 12 minute quarters. MLRH has offside and icing rules as well
as allowing players to have a single fight per game.

The French *Ligue Elite* is a professional league in Europe.

## Chief differences from ice hockey

Although inline hockey appears to simply be ice hockey on inline skates,
this singular difference reflects throughout the rest of the game,
resulting in important differences between the two sports.

Inline hockey is typically played at room temperature on a surface that,
rather than being made from (frozen) water, is kept dry to protect the
bearings in the skate wheels. Several surface materials are used,
including plastic tiles (sometimes known as sport-court flooring), wood,
and sealed concrete; in general, surfaces try to balance the ability of
wheels to grip against the ability of the puck to slide freely. None of
these surfaces, however, is as smooth as ice; as a result, the puck is
made of a much lighter plastic material, and rests on small nylon or
poly-plastic nubs to reduce friction with the rink surface.

Besides these equipment differences, inline hockey uses less physical
contact in comparison to ice hockey. Most leagues punish fighting
harshly, and body [checking](checking_(hockey) "wikilink") is usually
ruled a penalty. Inline hockey leagues generally require players to wear
full face masks, but otherwise, players tend to wear lighter clothes and
less protective padding.

Important differences in game rules also exist. Each inline hockey team
fields only four skaters and one goaltender (5 players) rather than ice
hockey's five skaters and one goaltender (six players). Many leagues do
not stop play for [icing](icing_(ice_hockey) "wikilink").
[Offside](Offside_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") rules are generally looser as
well; originally, a few leagues would call offside only on the center
line, presently, every rule book omits the rule entirely.

## Equipment

Inline hockey is a contact sport. Although body checks are usually not
allowed, injuries can still be a common occurrence. Protective equipment
is highly recommended and is enforced in all competitive situations.
This usually includes a helmet (cage worn if certain age), elbow pads,
protective gloves, athletic cup, shin pads, and skates at the very
least. In addition, goaltenders use different gear, (optionally) a neck
guard, chest/arm protector, blocker, catch glove, and leg pads.

### Skates

Good skates are stiffer and lighter and also have better bearings.
Inline hockey-skates are similar to icehockey-skates, the main
difference between ice and inline is the chassis and the wheels. Hockey
equipment manufacturers such as Bauer and CCM offer parallel models of
ice skates, but there are also inline hockey brands, including Mission,
Tour and Labeda.

Most inline hockey skates had have a chassis with 4 identical wheels on
each boot in 72, 76 or 80 mm diameter, or the "Hi-Lo" configuration of
two low wheels in front and two higher rear, this was patented on 12
July 1996 by Jon G Wong in the US and marketed by Mission. There is also
a chassis with a "Tri-Di" option, which allows three wheel sizes to be
mounted on a chassis, in the configuration 80-76-76-72 mm. Inline Hockey
wheels are much softer than road wheels, and therefore have more
abrasion. The softest are used for soft surfaces like gym floors or
interlocking plastic tiles, harder are used for surfaces such as
asphalt.

## The rink

The area where Inline hockey is played in known as a "rink". It consists
of a playing surface that is surrounded by a boundary (commonly referred
to as "dasher boards"), that is designed to separate the players from
the spectators as well as to keep the puck in play. The playing surface
is made of sport tile, wood, asphalt or cement and marked with special
lines that help the referees officiate the game according to the
official rules.

The recommended size of the rink can vary between 40m and 60m in length
and 20m and 30m in width. In Germany the old standard was 40m x 20m
which changed to 50m x 25m but also the ice hockey standard of 61m x
30.5m (200×100 ft) is used.

### Goal cages

One of the most fundamental differences between the IIHF and World
Skate-sanctioned versions of inline hockey lies within the dimensions of
the net. The IIHF simply retains the use of ice hockey nets. However the
World Skate rulebook substitutes the traditional ice hockey cage for a
lower and narrower model patterned after the one used in [rink
hockey](rink_hockey "wikilink"), the World Skates' flagship sport,
however most World Skate leagues in the United States and Canada opt for
the more popular and common ice hockey nets.

## Game

While the general characteristics of the game are the same wherever it
is played, the exact rules depend on the particular code of play being
used. The most important code is that of the [Comité International
Roller In-Line
Hockey](Comité_International_Roller_In-Line_Hockey "wikilink") (CIRILH),
an organization and discipline of the [Fédération Internationale de
Roller
Sports](Fédération_Internationale_de_Roller_Sports "wikilink")

Inline hockey is played on an *[inline hockey
rink](inline_hockey_rink "wikilink")*. During normal play, there are
five players per side on the floor at any time, one of them being the
[goaltender](goaltender "wikilink"), each of whom is on *inline hockey
skates*. The objective of the game is to score
*[goals](goal_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")* by shooting a hard
[plastic](plastic "wikilink") disc, the *puck*, into the opponent's goal
net, which is placed at the opposite end of the rink. The players may
control the puck using a long [stick](Hockey_stick "wikilink") with a
blade that is commonly curved at one end.

Players may also redirect the puck with any part of their bodies,
subject to certain restrictions. Players may not hold the puck in their
hand and are prohibited from using their hands to pass the puck to their
teammates, unless they are in the defensive zone. Players are also
prohibited from kicking the puck into the opponent's goal, though
unintentional redirections off the skate are permitted. Players may not
intentionally bat the puck into the net with their hands.

The four players other than the goaltender are typically divided into
two forwards and two defencemen. The
*[forward](Forward_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")* positions consist of a
*[center](Center_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")* and a
*[winger](Winger_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")*. The
*[defencemen](Defenceman_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")* usually stay together
as a pair generally divided between left and right. A substitution of an
entire unit at once is called a *line change*. Teams typically employ
alternate sets of forward lines and defensive pairings when
*[shorthanded](shorthanded "wikilink")* or on a *[power
play](Power_play_(sporting_term) "wikilink")*. Substitutions are
permitted at any time during the course of the game, although during a
stoppage of play the home team is permitted the final change. When
players are substituted during play, it is called changing *on the fly*.

The boards surrounding the floor help keep the puck in play and they can
also be used as tools to play the puck. Players are not permitted to
"[bodycheck](bodycheck "wikilink")" opponents into the boards as a means
of stopping progress. The referees and the outsides of the goal are "in
play" and do not cause a stoppage of the game when the puck or players
are influenced (by either bouncing or colliding) into them. Play can be
stopped if the goal is knocked out of position. Play often proceeds for
minutes without interruption. When play is stopped, it is restarted with
a *[faceoff](faceoff "wikilink")*. Two players "face" each other and an
official drops the puck to the floor, where the two players attempt to
gain control of the puck. Markings on the floor indicate the locations
for the "[faceoff](faceoff "wikilink")" and guide the positioning of
players.

There is one major rule of play in inline hockey that limit the movement
of the puck: the puck going out of play. The puck goes "out of play"
whenever it goes past the perimeter of the rink (Onto the player
benches, over the "glass," or onto the protective netting above the
glass) and a stoppage of play is called by the officials using whistles.
It also does not matter if the puck comes back onto the playing surface
from those areas as the puck is considered dead once it leaves the
perimeter of the rink.

Under FIRS rules, each team may carry a maximum of 14 players and two
goaltenders on their roster. The players are usually divided into three
lines of two forwards, two pairs of defenceman, and two extra skaters.

## Penalties

For most penalties, the offending player is sent to the "[penalty
box](penalty_box "wikilink")" and his team has to play with one less
skater for a short amount of time. *Minor* penalties last for two
minutes, *major* penalties last for five minutes, and a *double minor*
penalty is two *consecutive* penalties of two minutes duration. A single
*Minor* penalty may be extended by a further two minutes for drawing
blood from the victimized player. The team that has taken the penalty is
said to be playing *[shorthanded](shorthanded "wikilink")* while the
other team is on a [power play](power_play_(sport) "wikilink").

A two-minute *minor penalty* is often called for lesser infractions such
as [tripping](tripping_(ice_hockey) "wikilink"),
[elbowing](elbow_(strike) "wikilink"), [roughing](roughing "wikilink"),
[high-sticking](high-sticking "wikilink"), [delay of the
game](delay_of_game "wikilink"), [too many players on the
rink](too_many_men "wikilink"),
[boarding](boarding_(ice_hockey) "wikilink"), illegal equipment,
holding, interference, [hooking](hooking_(ice_hockey) "wikilink"),
[slashing](slashing_(ice_hockey) "wikilink"), butt-ending (striking an
opponent with the knob of the stick—a very rare penalty) Or
[cross-checking](cross-checking "wikilink"). A minor is also assessed
for [diving](diving_(ice_hockey) "wikilink"), where a player embellishes
a hook or trip. More egregious fouls may be penalized by a four-minute
*double-minor* penalty, particularly those which cause injury to the
victimized player. These penalties end either when the time runs out or
the other team scores on the power play. In the case of a goal scored
during the first two minutes of a double-minor, the penalty clock is set
down to two minutes upon a score effectively expiring the first minor
penalty. Five-minute *major penalties* are called for especially violent
instances of most minor infractions that result in intentional injury to
an opponent, or when a "minor" penalty results in visible injury (such
as bleeding), as well as for fighting. Major penalties are always served
in full; they do not terminate on a goal scored by the other team.

Some varieties of penalties do not always require the offending team to
play a man short. Concurrent five-minute major penalties in the FIRS
usually result from fighting. In the case of two players being assessed
five-minute fighting majors, they both serve five minutes without their
team incurring a loss of player (both teams still have a full complement
of players on the floor). This differs with two players from opposing
sides getting minor penalties, at the same time or at any intersecting
moment, resulting from more common infractions. In that case, both teams
will have only three skating players (not counting the goaltender) until
one or both penalties expire (if one expires before the other, the
opposing team gets a power play for the remainder); this applies
regardless of current pending penalties, though in the FIRS, a team
always has at least two skaters on the rink. Ten-minute *misconduct*
penalties are served in full by the penalized player, but his team may
immediately substitute another player on the floor *unless* a minor or
major penalty is assessed in conjunction with the misconduct (a
*two-and-ten* or *five-and-ten*). In that case, the team designates
another player to serve the minor or major; both players go to the
penalty box, but only the designee may not be replaced, and he is
released upon the expiration of the two or five minutes, at which point
the ten-minute misconduct begins. In addition, *game misconducts* are
assessed for deliberate intent to inflict severe injury on an opponent
(at the officials' discretion), or for a major penalty for a stick
infraction or repeated major penalties. The offending player is ejected
from the game and must immediately leave the playing surface (he does
not sit in the penalty box); meanwhile, if a minor or major is assessed
in addition, a designated player must serve out that segment of the
penalty in the box (similar to the above-mentioned "two-and-ten"). In
some rare cases, a player may receive up to nineteen minutes in
penalties for one string of plays. This could involve receiving a
four-minute double minor penalty, getting in a fight with an opposing
player who retaliates, and then receiving a game misconduct after the
fight. In this case, the player is ejected and two teammates must serve
the double-minor and major penalties.

A player who is tripped, or illegally obstructed in some way, by an
opponent on a *[breakaway](Breakaway_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")* – when
there are no defenders except the goaltender between him and the
opponent's goal – is awarded a *[penalty
shot](Penalty_shot_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")*, an attempt to score
without opposition from any defenders except the goaltender. A penalty
shot is also awarded for a defender other than the goaltender covering
the puck in the goal crease, a goaltender intentionally displacing his
own goal posts during a breakaway to avoid a goal, a defender
intentionally displacing his own goal posts when there is less than two
minutes to play in regulation time or at any point during overtime, or a
player or coach intentionally throwing a stick or other object at the
puck or the puck carrier and the throwing action disrupts a shot or pass
play.

Officials also stop play for puck movement violations, such as using
one's hands to pass the puck in the offensive end, but no players are
penalized for these offenses. The sole exceptions are deliberately
falling on or gathering the puck to the body, carrying the puck in the
hand, and shooting the puck out of play in one's defensive zone (all
penalized two minutes for delay of game).

## Officials

A typical game of inline hockey has two
*[officials](Official_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")* on the floor, charged
with enforcing the rules of the game. There are typically two *referees*
who call goals and penalties. Due to not having
[offside](Offside_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") and
[icing](Icing_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") violations, there usually are no
*linesmen* used. On-ice officials are assisted by off-ice officials who
act as time keepers, and official scorers.

Officials are selected by the league for which they work. Amateur hockey
leagues use guidelines established by national organizing bodies as a
basis for choosing their officiating staffs. In North America, the
national organizing bodies [USA Roller
Sports](USA_Roller_Sports "wikilink") and Canada Inline approve
officials according to their experience level as well as their ability
to pass rules knowledge and skating ability tests.

## Tactics

### Offensive tactics

Offensive tactics include improving a team's position on the floor by
advancing the puck towards the opponent's goal. FIRS rules have no
[offside](Offside_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") or [two-line
passes](two-line_pass "wikilink"). A player may pass the puck to a
player on any spot on the floor. Offensive tactics, are designed
ultimately to score a goal by taking a shot. When a player purposely
directs the puck towards the opponent's goal, he or she is said to
"shoot" the puck.

A *deflection* is a shot which redirects a shot or a pass towards the
goal from another player, by allowing the puck to strike the stick and
carom towards the goal. A *one-timer* is a shot which is struck directly
off a pass, without receiving the pass and shooting in two separate
actions. *Headmanning the puck*, also known as *cherry-picking, the
stretch pass or* *breaking out*, is the tactic of rapidly passing to the
player farthest down the floor.

A team that is losing by one or two goals in the last few minutes of
play will often elect to *pull the goalie*; that is, remove the
goaltender and replace him or her with an *[extra
attacker](extra_attacker "wikilink")* on the floor in the hope of
gaining enough advantage to score a goal. However, it is an act of
desperation, as it sometimes leads to the opposing team extending their
lead by scoring a goal in the empty net.

A *delayed penalty call* occurs when a penalty offense is committed by
the team that does not have possession of the puck. In this circumstance
the team with possession of the puck is allowed to complete the play;
that is, play continues until a goal is scored, a player on the opposing
team gains control of the puck, or the team in possession commits an
infraction or penalty of their own. Because the team on which the
penalty was called cannot control the puck without stopping play, it is
impossible for them to score a goal, however, it is possible for the
controlling team to mishandle the puck into their own net. In these
cases the team in possession of the puck can pull the goalie for an
extra attacker without fear of being scored on. If a delayed penalty is
signaled and the team in possession scores, the penalty is still
assessed to the offending player, but not served.

One of the most important strategies for a team is their *forecheck*.
Forechecking is the act of attacking the opposition in their defensive
zone. Forechecking is an important part of roller hockey, because
certain leagues and rules allow teams that have possession of the puck
to sit behind their net and wait until they are pressured before having
to advance the puck. Each team will use their own unique forecheck
system but the main ones are: 1–1–2, 1–2–1, and 1–3. The 1–1–2 is the
most basic forecheck system where one forward will go in deep and
pressure the opposition's defencemen, the second forward stays in the
*slot*, and the two defencemen high. The 1–3 is the most defensive
forecheck system where one forward will apply pressure to the puck
carrier in the opponent's zone and the other three players stand
basically in a line in their defensive zone in hopes the opposition will
skate into one of them.

Roller hockey is unique in that its rules resemble more of a
basketball/soccer/lacrosse strategy in many ways versus a traditional
ice hockey approach.

There are many other little tactics used in the game of hockey.
*Pinching* is the term used when a defenceman pressures the opposition's
winger in the offensive zone when they are breaking out, attempting to
stop their attack and keep the puck in the offensive zone. A *saucer
pass* is a pass used when an opposition's stick or body is in the
passing lane. It is the act of raising the puck over the obstruction and
having it land on a teammates' stick.

### Deke

A "deke," short for "decoy," is a [feint](feint "wikilink") with the
body and/or stick to fool a defender or the goalie. Due to the increased
room and lack of body checking, many inline hockey players have picked
up the skill of "dangling," which is more fancy deking and requires more
stick handling skills. Some of the more impressive "dekes" or "dangles"
include the toe-drag, the [Pavel Datsyuk](Pavel_Datsyuk "wikilink"), the
back hand toe-drag, and the spin-o-rama.

### Fights

Fighting is prohibited in the rules. It does happen rarely, however.
Players used to an ice hockey mentality fight to demoralize the opposing
players while exciting their own, as well as settling personal scores. A
fight will also break if one of the team's skilled players gets hit hard
or someone gets hit by what the team perceives as a dirty hit. Amateur
recreation level players who play strictly inline hockey never consider
fisticuffs a legitimate behavior. The amateur game penalizes fisticuffs
more harshly, as a player who receives a fighting major is also assessed
at least a 10-minute misconduct penalty or a game misconduct penalty and
[suspension](suspension_(punishment) "wikilink"). Most local recreation
leagues also suspend or ban players who engage in fights.

## Periods and overtime

A professional game consists of two *halves* of twenty minutes each, the
clock running only when the puck is in play. The teams change ends for
the second half, and again at the start of each overtime played
(playoffs only; same ends as the second half otherwise). Some leagues
such as the American Inline Hockey League (AIHL), recreational leagues
and children's leagues often play shorter games, generally with two
shorter periods or three running clock periods of play.

Various procedures are used if a game is tied. Some leagues and
tournaments do not use an
*[overtime](Overtime_(ice_hockey) "wikilink")*, unless a "winner" must
be determined, such as in tournament *pool play* and league *regular
season*. Others will us either one, or a combination of; *sudden death
[overtime](Overtime_(ice_hockey) "wikilink") periods*, or *[penalty
shootouts](Shootout_(hockey) "wikilink")*. Usually up to two 5-minute
[sudden death](sudden_death_(sport) "wikilink") overtimes are played; if
still tied, penalty shootouts.

## Playing surface

Indoor inline hockey is played on any suitable non-slip surface. While
converted roller rinks may use wooden floors, dedicated inline hockey
facilities use Sport Court or similar surface, which allows maximum
traction to inline hockey wheels whilst providing a smooth, unbroken
gliding surface for the puck. The playing area should be surrounded by
full boards similar to ice hockey with glass or fencing to a height of
around 2m. Often, especially in European countries, the game is played
in indoor sports halls, on wooden floors. Therefore, there will be no
standardized boards but instead the perimeter of the playing surface
will be brick walls. In such cases, the corners of the hall are rounded
off with added curved boards.

## Variants

### Inline sledge hockey

Based on Ice Sledge Hockey, Inline Sledge Hockey is played to the same
rules as Inline Puck Hockey (essentially ice hockey played off ice using
inline skates) and has been made possible by the design and manufacture
of inline sledges by RGK, Europe's premier sports wheelchair maker.

There is no classification points system dictating who can be involved
in play within Inline Sledge Hockey unlike other team sports such as
Wheelchair Basketball and Wheelchair Rugby. Inline Sledge Hockey is
being developed to allow everyone, regardless of whether they have a
disability or not, to complete up to World Championship level based
solely on talent and ability. This makes Inline Sledge Hockey truly
inclusive.

The first game of Inline Sledge Hockey was played at Bisley, England on
19 December 2009 between the Hull Stingrays and the Grimsby Redwings.
[Matt Lloyd (Paralympian)](Matt_Lloyd_(Paralympian) "wikilink") is
credited with inventing Inline Sledge Hockey and Great Britain is seen
as the international leader in the game's development.

### Street hockey

[Street hockey](Street_hockey "wikilink") is a form of inline hockey
played as pick-up hockey on streets or parking lots. Street hockey
tends to have very relaxed rules, as any pickup street game or sport
would have.

### Blind inline hockey

Blind inline hockey is also played by athletes who are totally blind or
visually impaired. Sighted players can also play, as all players must
play while wearing opaque goggles, making all play sightless and
"evening the playing field." The blind game is best played on a
regulation inline surface with two orienting, tactile zone lines, each
60 feet from the goal line. Either 5v5 or 4v4 skaters, each plus
goalies, are both good games.

The puck and goals each have a sounding device that enable the players
to hear the puck and orient themselves to direction on the playing
surface. The players constantly communicate to their teammates regarding
their actions and positions on the floor enabling teamwork and
playmaking. A sighted referee directs stoppages and restarts. All usual
hockey rules apply to blind play.

## Sanctioning bodies

There are two lines of sanctioning bodies for inline hockey: those that
are related to the roller sports community and those related to the ice
hockey community. The [International Ice Hockey
Federation](International_Ice_Hockey_Federation "wikilink") organizes
[IIHF Inline Hockey World
Championships](IIHF_Inline_Hockey_World_Championships "wikilink") but
the sport is recognized as being governed by the [International Roller
Sports Federation](International_Roller_Sports_Federation "wikilink")
which organizes [FIRS Inline Hockey World
Championships](FIRS_Inline_Hockey_World_Championships "wikilink").

USA Roller Sports is sanctioned by the International Olympic Committee
to oversee roller sports. See the related links below for national
bodies and further information.

Worldwide  

-   [IIHF
    Inline](http://www.iihf.com/home-of-hockey/championships/inline.html)
-   [Fédération Internationale de Roller Sports
    (FIRS)](http://www.rollersports.org/)

Argentina  

-   [Confederacion Argentina de Patin (CAP)](http://www.capatin.com//)
-   [Asociación Argentina de Hockey sobre Hielo y en Línea
    (AAHHL)](http://www.aahhl.com.ar//)

Australia  

-   [Skate Australia](http://www.skateaustralia.org.au/)

Belgium  

-   [Belgian Inline Hockey Federation](http://www.rbihf.be)

Brazil  

-   [Brazil Hockey and Skating Confederation](http://www.cbhp.com.br)

Canada  

-   [Roller Hockey Canada (formerly National Inline Hockey Association –
    Canada)](http://www.niha.ca/) (affiliated with
    [IIHF](IIHF "wikilink"))
-   [Canada Inline](http://www.canadainline.com/) (affiliated with
    [FIRS](Fédération_Internationale_de_Roller_Sports "wikilink"))

Czech Republic  

-   [Czech Asociacion Inline Hockey](http://www.inlinehokej.cz/)

Colombia  

-   [Colombia Play Hockey league](https://www.fedehockey.com/)

Chile  

-   [Chile Inline Hockey Federation](http://www.inlinehockey.cl)

Ecuador  

-   [Ecuador Hockey League](http://ehl-ecuador.com)

France  

-   [French Inline Hockey
    Federation](https://ffroller-skateboard.fr/blog/discipline/roller_hockey/)

Germany  

-   [German Federation of Roller Sports](https://driv.de/)

Hong Kong/China  

-   [Hong Kong/China inline Hockey
    Association](http://www.hkciha.com.hk/)

Ireland  

-   [Irish Ice Hockey Association](http://www.iiha.org/)
-   [Inline Hockey Ireland](http://www.inlinehockeyireland.org/)

Israel  

-   [Israeli Inline Hockey League (PIHL)](http://www.pihl.hockey.co.il)

Italy  

-   [Italian Inline Hockey League (LNH)](http://www.legahockey.eu/)
-   [Italian Inline Hockey League
    TV](http://www.legahockeytv.it/home.php?sport=2)
-   [Italian Hockey and Skating Federation
    (FIHP)](http://www.fihp.org/hil/)

New Zealand  

-   [New Zealand Inline Hockey Association](http://www.nziha.com/)

Norway  

-   [Norwegian Ice Hockey Federation](http://www.hockey.no/)

Peru  

-   [Peruvian Inline Hockey Association](http://www.aphl.com.pe/)

Portugal  

-   [Federação de Patinagem de Portugal](http://fpp.pt/)

Russian Federation  

-   [Федерация Инлайн Хоккея России](http://rollerhockey.ru/)

Slovenia  

-   [Slovenian Inline Hockey Association](http://www.inline.si/)

Spain  

-   [Federacion Española de patinaje](http://www.fep.es/)

Sweden  

-   [Swedish Winter League](https://gbginline.se/)

Switzerland  

-   [Inline-Hockey Switzerland](http://www.ih-s.ch/)
-   [Swiss Inline-Hockey Cup](http://www.sih-p/)

The Netherlands  

-   [Inline Skaterhockey Netherlands](http://www.inlineskaterhockey.nl/)

United Kingdom  

-   [Inline hockey in the United
    Kingdom](Inline_hockey_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")

United States  

-   [NRHL – National Roller Hockey
    League](http://www.thenationalrollerhockeyleague.com/)
-   [MLRH – Major League Roller Hockey](http://www.mlrh.com/)
-   [MRHL – Midwest Roller Hockey League](http://www.themrhl.com/)

## International competitions

There are several international competitions with national teams.

### World

-   [World Roller Games](World_Roller_Games "wikilink")
-   [FIRS Inline Hockey World
    Championships](FIRS_Inline_Hockey_World_Championships "wikilink")
-   [IIHF InLine Hockey World
    Championship](IIHF_InLine_Hockey_World_Championship "wikilink")
    (defunct)

## Domestic competitions

### United States

-   [National Roller Hockey
    League](National_Roller_Hockey_League "wikilink") (inactive)
-   [Roller Hockey
    International](Roller_Hockey_International "wikilink") (defunct)

## See also

-   [Street hockey](Street_hockey "wikilink")
-   [Skater hockey](Skater_hockey "wikilink")
-   [Indoor field hockey](Indoor_field_hockey "wikilink")
