# Royal corgis

The **royal corgis** are the [Pembroke Welsh
Corgi](Pembroke_Welsh_Corgi "wikilink") dogs formerly owned by [Queen
Elizabeth II](Queen_Elizabeth_II "wikilink") and her parents, [King
George VI](King_George_VI "wikilink") and [Queen Elizabeth The Queen
Mother](Queen_Elizabeth_The_Queen_Mother "wikilink"). Fond of corgis
since she was a small child, Elizabeth II owned more than 30 corgis from
her accession in 1952 until her death in 2022.[1][2] She owned at least
one corgi throughout the years 1933 to 2018.[3]

The royal corgis were globally publicised (such as in the cover photo
and feature article of *Vanity Fair*'s Summer 2016 edition).[4] Leaving
a lasting legacy after death, they have been depicted and immortalised
in various artwork, such as statues, professional photographs, and
paintings. For instance, the [crown
coin](Crown_(British_Coin) "wikilink") commemorating the [Golden Jubilee
of Elizabeth II](Golden_Jubilee_of_Elizabeth_II "wikilink") depicts the
Queen with a corgi.[5]

## History

The Queen was very fond of corgis since she was a small child,[8] having
fallen in love with the corgis owned by the children of [the Marquess of
Bath](Thomas_Thynne,_5th_Marquess_of_Bath "wikilink").[9] [King George
VI](King_George_VI "wikilink") brought home
[Dookie](Dookie_(dog) "wikilink") in 1933.[10] A photograph from George
VI's photo album shows a ten-year-old Princess Elizabeth (later [Queen
Elizabeth II](Queen_Elizabeth_II "wikilink")) with Dookie at
[Balmoral](Balmoral_Castle "wikilink"). Elizabeth and her sister
[Princess Margaret](Princess_Margaret "wikilink") would feed Dookie by
hand from a dish held by a footman.[11] The other early favourite corgi
during the same time was Jane.[12]

Elizabeth II's mother, at that time [Queen
Elizabeth](Queen_Elizabeth_The_Queen_Mother "wikilink"), introduced a
disciplined regimen for the dogs; each was to have its own
[wicker](wicker "wikilink") basket, raised above the floor to avoid
draughts. Meals were served for each dog in its own dish, the diet
approved by [veterinary experts](veterinary_physician "wikilink") with
no tidbits from the royal table. A proprietary brand of meat dog
biscuits was served in the morning, while the late afternoon meal
consisted of dog meal with gravy. Extra biscuits were handed out for
celebrations and rewards.

Crackers (24 December 1939, Windsor – November, 1953) was one of the
Queen Mother's corgis, and nearly a constant companion; he retired with
the Queen Mother to the [Castle of Mey](Castle_of_Mey "wikilink") in
Scotland.[13] In 1944, Elizabeth was given
[Susan](Susan_(dog) "wikilink") as a gift on her 18th birthday.[14]
Susan accompanied Elizabeth on her honeymoon in 1947. The corgis owned
by the Queen are descended from Susan.[15][16][17] Rozavel Sue, daughter
of Rozavel Lucky Strike, an international champion, was one of the
Queen's corgis in the early 1950s.

One of Elizabeth's corgis mated with a Dachshund named Pipkin who
belonged to [Princess Margaret](Princess_Margaret "wikilink") which
resulted in the first royal dorgi.[18] The two siblings would later
breed more dorgis.[19]

When Elizabeth and [Prince
Philip](Prince_Philip,_Duke_of_Edinburgh "wikilink") visited [Grand
Cayman](Grand_Cayman "wikilink") in 1983, government officials gave her
[black coral](black_coral "wikilink") sculptures of a corgi and a horse
as a gift, both made by Bernard Passman.[20]

## Domestic life

Sugar was the nursery pet of Prince Charles (now [Charles
III](Charles_III "wikilink")) and [Princess
Anne](Anne,_Princess_Royal "wikilink").[21] In 1955, her dogs, Whisky
and Sherry, were surprise Christmas gifts from the Queen to the Prince
and Princess.[22] Pictured with the royal family, the corgi Sugar made
the cover of *The Australian Women's Weekly* on 10 June 1959.[23]
Sugar's twin, Honey, belonged to the Queen Mother; Honey took midday
runs with Johnny and Pippin, Princess Margaret's corgis, whilst the
Princess lived in Buckingham Palace. Heather was born in 1962 and became
one of the Queen's favourites. Heather was the mother of Tiny, Bushy,
and Foxy; Foxy gave birth to Brush in 1969.[24]

The corgis enjoyed a privileged life in Buckingham Palace. They resided
in a bespoke room devoted to their habitation, known as the Corgi Room,
and slept in elevated wicker baskets.[25] The Queen tended to the corgis
in her [kennel](kennel "wikilink") herself. She also chose the sires of
litters that were bred in her kennel. The corgis had an extensive menu
at the palace which included fresh rabbit and beef, served by a gourmet
chef.[26] At Christmas, the Queen made stockings for the pets full of
toys and delicacies such as biscuits.[27] In 1999, one of Queen
Elizabeth's royal footmen was demoted from Buckingham Palace for his
"party trick of pouring [booze](Alcoholic_beverage "wikilink") [into the
corgis' food and water](Mickey_Finn_(drugs) "wikilink")" and watching
them "[staggering about](Alcohol_intoxication "wikilink")" with
relish.[28]

In 2007, the Queen was noted to have five corgis, Monty, Emma, Linnet,
Willow, and Holly; five [cocker spaniels](cocker_spaniel "wikilink"),
Bisto, Oxo, Flash, Spick, and Span; and four "Dorgis"
([dachshund](dachshund "wikilink")-corgi
[crossbreeds](Crossbred_dog "wikilink")), Cider, Berry, Vulcan, and
Candy.[29] In 2012, Queen Elizabeth II's corgis Monty, Willow, and Holly
appeared during the brief [James Bond](James_Bond "wikilink") sketch
when [Daniel Craig](Daniel_Craig "wikilink") arrived at Buckingham
Palace for a mission to take the queen to the [2012 Summer
Olympics](2012_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") opening ceremony. Monty, who
had previously belonged to the [Queen
Mother](Queen_Elizabeth_The_Queen_Mother "wikilink"), and one of her
"Dorgis" died in September 2012.[30] Monty had been named after the
[horse whisperer](horse_whisperer "wikilink") and friend of the Queen,
[Monty Roberts](Monty_Roberts "wikilink").[31] It was reported in July
2015 that the Queen stopped breeding corgis as she did not wish any to
survive her in the event of her death. Monty Roberts had urged Elizabeth
to breed more corgis in 2012, but she had told him that she "didn't want
to leave any young dog behind" and wanted to put an end to the
practice.[32]

By April 2018, with the death of Willow, the Queen no longer had any
full-bred corgis. Only one dorgi, Candy, was still alive.[33] Candy was
joined by another Dorgi pup named Fergus and a pure-bred corgi called
Muick in 2021, both gifts from her son [Prince
Andrew](Prince_Andrew "wikilink"), and granddaughters Princesses
[Beatrice](Princess_Beatrice "wikilink") and
[Eugenie](Princess_Eugenie "wikilink") to cheer her up while her
husband, Prince Philip, was recovering from heart surgery.[34][35]
Fergus however died from a heart defect at five-months old in the same
year.[36] In June 2021, the Queen was gifted a new corgi, Sandy, by
Andrew, Beatrice and Eugenie.[37] It was [Sarah, Duchess of
York](Sarah,_Duchess_of_York "wikilink"), who found the puppies that
were gifted to the Queen.[38] After [the Queen's
death](Death_and_state_funeral_of_Elizabeth_II "wikilink") in September
2022, it was announced that Andrew and Sarah would adopt the two
surviving royal corgis, and they would be resettled to their residence
in the [Royal Lodge](Royal_Lodge "wikilink") on the [Windsor
Estate](Windsor_Estate "wikilink").[39][40]

The dogs have traditionally been buried at the royal residence,
Sandringham estate in [Norfolk](Norfolk "wikilink"), at which they
died.[41] The graveyard was first used by [Queen
Victoria](Queen_Victoria "wikilink") when her
[Collie](Collie "wikilink"), Noble, died in 1887.[42]

## Attacks

On several occasions, the Queen or her staff have been injured by the
corgis. In 1954, the palace clock winder, Leonard Hubbard, was bitten by
[Susan](Susan_(dog) "wikilink") upon entering the nursery at the [Royal
Lodge](Royal_Lodge "wikilink"),
[Windsor](Windsor_Great_Park "wikilink").[43][44][45] Later in the same
year, one of the Queen Mother's corgis bit a policeman on guard duty in
London.[46]

In 1968, Labour MP [Peter Doig](Peter_Doig_(politician) "wikilink")
called for the royal staff to put up a "[Beware of the
dog](Beware_of_the_dog "wikilink")" sign at
[Balmoral](Balmoral_Castle "wikilink") after one of the corgis bit a
postman.[47] In February 1989, it was reported that the royal family had
hired an animal psychologist to tame the dogs after they developed a
habit of nipping them and the staff.[48] In 1989, the Queen Mother’s
dog, Ranger, led a pack of corgis that attacked and killed the Queen’s
beloved dorgi, Chipper.[49] In March 1991, the Queen was bitten after
trying to break up a fight between ten or so of her corgis. She had to
have three stitches to her left hand. John Collins, the Queen Mother's
chauffeur, had to have a [tetanus](tetanus "wikilink") injection after
he also tried to intervene.[50] In 2003, Pharos, a tenth-generation
offspring of Susan, was put down after being mauled by [Princess
Anne](Princess_Anne "wikilink")'s [English bull
terrier](Bull_Terrier "wikilink"), Dottie. Anne arrived at
[Sandringham](Sandringham_House "wikilink") to visit her mother for
Christmas and the corgis rushed out of the front door as they arrived.
It was reported that "Dottie went for Pharos, savaging the corgi's hind
legs and breaking one in three places."[51]

## Influence

The royal corgis are known all across the world and are closely
associated with the former Queen. The corgis have had numerous items
dedicated to them, in particular being the subject of many statues and
works of art. Because of the Queen's fondness for the Welsh Corgi, an
increased number of corgis were exhibited in the 1954 West Australian
Canine Association's Royal Show.[52] Queen Elizabeth II's crown coin KM#
1135, made of copper nickel of size 33 mm, issued during her [Golden
Jubilee year](Golden_Jubilee_of_Elizabeth_II "wikilink"), shows the
Queen with a corgi.[53] Cartoonist [Carl Giles](Carl_Giles "wikilink")
included the corgis in every cartoon he drew of the Queen after
1962.[54]

The pets are the subject of an animated comedy film by Belgian studio
[NWave Pictures](NWave_Pictures "wikilink"), called *[The Queen's
Corgi](The_Queen's_Corgi "wikilink")*, which was released in the UK in
July 2019.[55]

Elizabeth herself was occasionally portrayed as an anthropomorphic corgi
in animated media, including the 2015*[Mickey
Mouse](Mickey_Mouse_(TV_series) "wikilink")* short "One Man Band"[56]
and the Australian animated series
*[Bluey](Bluey_(2018_TV_series) "wikilink")*.