# Sham Surgery

**Sham surgery** (or **placebo surgery**) is a faked [surgical
intervention](surgery "wikilink") that omits the step thought to be
therapeutically necessary.

In [clinical trials](clinical_trials "wikilink") of surgical
interventions, sham surgery is an important [scientific
control](scientific_control "wikilink"). This is because it isolates the
specific effects of the treatment as opposed to the incidental effects
caused by [anesthesia](anesthesia "wikilink"), the
[incisional](Surgical_incision "wikilink") trauma, pre- and
postoperative care, and the patient's perception of having had a regular
operation. Thus sham surgery serves an analogous purpose to
[placebo](placebo "wikilink") drugs, neutralizing biases such as the
[placebo effect](placebo_effect "wikilink").

## Human research

A number of studies done under [Institutional Review
Board](Institutional_review_board "wikilink")-approved settings have
delivered important and surprising results. With the progress in
[minimally invasive surgery](minimally_invasive_surgery "wikilink"),
sham procedures can be more easily performed as the sham incision can be
kept small similarly to the incision in the studied procedure.

A review of studies with sham surgery found 53 such studies: in 39 there
was improvement with the sham operation and in 27 the sham procedure was
as good as the real operation.[1] Sham-controlled interventions have
therefore identified interventions that are useless but had been
believed by the medical community to be helpful based on studies without
the use of sham surgery.[2][3][4][5][6]

### Examples

#### Cardiovascular diseases

In 1939 Fieschi introduced [internal
mammary](internal_mammary_artery "wikilink") ligation as a procedure to
improve blood flow to the heart. Not until a controlled study was done
two decades later could it be demonstrated that the procedure was only
as effective as the sham surgery.[7][8]

#### Central nervous system disease

In neurosurgery, cell-transplant surgical interventions were offered in
many centers in the world for patients with [Parkinson
disease](Parkinson_disease "wikilink") until sham-controlled experiments
involving the drilling of [burr](Burr_(cutter) "wikilink") holes into
the [skull](Human_skull "wikilink") demonstrated such interventions to
be ineffective and possibly harmful.[9] Subsequently, over 90% of
surveyed investigators believed that future neurosurgical interventions
(e.g. [gene transfer](gene_transfer "wikilink") therapies) should be
evaluated by sham-controlled studies as these are superior to
open-control designs, and have found it unethical to conduct an
open-control study because the design is not strong enough to protect
against the placebo effect and bias.[10] Kim et al. point out that sham
procedures can differ significantly in invasiveness, for instance in
neurosurgical experiments the investigator may drill a burr hole to the
[dura mater](dura_mater "wikilink") only or enter the brain.[11] In
March 2013 a [sham surgical
study](http://medicine.buffalo.edu/news_and_events/news.host.html/content/shared/smbs/news/2013/03/ccsvi-ms-2482.detail.html)
of a popular but biologically inexplicable venous balloon angioplasty
procedure for multiple sclerosis showed the surgery was no better than
placebo.

#### Orthopedic diseases

Moseley and coworkers studied the effect of [arthroscopic
surgery](arthroscopic_surgery "wikilink") for
[osteoarthritis](osteoarthritis "wikilink") of the knee establishing two
treatment groups and a sham-operated control group.[12] They found that
patients in the treatment group did no better than those in the control
group. The fact that all three groups improved equally points to the
placebo effect in surgical interventions.

In a 2016 study it was found that arthroscopic partial meniscectomy does
not offer any benefit over sham surgery in relieving symptoms of knee
locking or catching in patients with degenerative meniscal tears.[13]

A randomised controlled trial was carried out to investigate the
effectiveness of shoulder surgery to remove an acromial spur (bony
protuberance on x-ray) in patients with shoulder pain. This found that
improvement after sham surgery was as great as with real surgery.[14]

A systematic review has identified a number of studies comparing
orthopedic surgery to sham surgery. This demonstrates that it is
possible to undertake such studies and that the findings are
important.[15]

## Animal research

Sham surgery has been widely used in surgical animal models.
Historically, studies in animals also allowed the removal or alteration
of an organ; using sham-operated animals as control, deductions could be
made about the function of the organ. Sham interventions can also be
performed as controls when new surgical procedures are developed.

For instance, a study documenting the effect of ONS (Optical Nerve
Section) on Guinea pigs detailed its sham surgery as:[16] "In the case
of optic nerve section, a small incision was then made in the dural
sheath of the optic nerve to access the nerve fibers, which were teased
free and cut. The same procedure was followed for animals undergoing
sham surgery, except that the optic nerve was left intact after
visualization."