# Wisdom tooth

The **third molar**, commonly called **wisdom tooth**, is the most
[posterior](posterior_(anatomy) "wikilink") of the three
[molars](molar_(tooth) "wikilink") in each
[quadrant](Commonly_used_terms_of_relationship_and_comparison_in_dentistry#Quadrant "wikilink")
of the [human dentition](human_tooth "wikilink"). The age at which
wisdom teeth come through ([erupt](tooth_eruption "wikilink")) is
variable,[1] but this generally occurs between late teens and early
twenties.[2] Most adults have four wisdom teeth, one in each of the four
quadrants, but it is possible to have none, fewer, or more, in which
case the extras are called [supernumerary
teeth](hyperdontia "wikilink"). Wisdom teeth may become stuck
([impacted](impacted_wisdom_teeth "wikilink"))[3] against other teeth if
there is not enough space for them to come through normally. Impacted
wisdom teeth are still sometimes removed for orthodontic treatment,
believing that they move the other teeth and cause crowding, though this
is not held anymore as true.[4][5]

Impacted wisdom teeth may suffer from [tooth
decay](tooth_decay "wikilink") if oral hygiene becomes more difficult.
Wisdom teeth which are partially erupted through the gum may also cause
inflammation[6] and infection in the surrounding gum tissues, termed
[pericoronitis](pericoronitis "wikilink"). More [conservative
treatments](Conservative_management "wikilink"), such as
[operculectomies](Pericoronitis#Operculectomy "wikilink"), may be
appropriate for some cases. However, impacted wisdom teeth are commonly
[extracted](Dental_extraction "wikilink") to treat or prevent these
problems. Some sources oppose the [prophylactic
removal](preventive_healthcare "wikilink") of disease-free impacted
wisdom teeth, including the [National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence](National_Institute_for_Health_and_Care_Excellence "wikilink")
in the UK.[7][8][9]

## History

Although formally known as third molars, the common name is wisdom teeth
because they appear so late – much later than the other teeth, at an age
where people are presumably "wiser" than as a child, when the other
teeth erupt.[10] The term probably came as a translation of the
[Latin](Latin "wikilink") *dens sapientiae*. Their eruption has been
known to cause dental issues for millennia; it was noted at least as far
back as [Aristotle](Aristotle "wikilink"):

The oldest known impacted wisdom tooth belonged to a European woman who
lived between 13,000 and 11,000 [BCE](Common_Era "wikilink"), in the
[Magdalenian](Magdalenian "wikilink") period.[11] Nonetheless, molar
impaction was relatively rare prior to the modern era. With the
[Industrial Revolution](Industrial_Revolution "wikilink"), the
affliction became ten times more common, owing to the new prevalence of
soft, [processed foods](Convenience_food "wikilink").[12][13]

## Structure

### Tooth morphology

Morphology of wisdom teeth can be variable.

Maxillary (upper) third molars commonly have a triangular crown with a
deep central fossa from which multiple irregular fissures originate.
Their roots are commonly fused together and can be irregular in shape.

Mandibular (lower) third molars are the smallest molar teeth in the
permanent dentition. The crown usually takes on a rounded rectangular
shape that features four or five cusps with an irregular fissure
pattern. Roots are greatly reduced in size and can be fused
together.[14]

### Dental notation

There are several notation systems used in dentistry to identify teeth. 
Under the [Palmer/Zsigmondy system](Palmer_notation "wikilink"), the
right and left maxillary wisdom teeth are represented by <sup>8</sup>┘
and └<sup>8</sup>, while <sub>8</sub>┐and ┌<sub>8</sub> represent the
right and left mandibular wisdom teeth.[15] Under the [FDI notational
system](FDI_World_Dental_Federation_notation "wikilink"), the right and
left maxillary third molars are numbered 18 and 28, respectively, and
the right and left mandibular third molars are numbered 48 and 38.[16]
According to the [Universal Numbering
System](Universal_Numbering_System "wikilink") the right and left upper
wisdom teeth are numbered 1 and 16 and the right and left lower wisdom
teeth are 17 and 32.[17]

### Variation

[Agenesis](Agenesis "wikilink") of wisdom teeth differs by population,
ranging from practically zero in [Aboriginal
Tasmanians](Aboriginal_Tasmanians "wikilink") to nearly 100% in
[indigenous Mexicans](Indigenous_peoples_in_Mexico "wikilink")[18] (see
[research
paper](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0162070)
with world map showing prevalence). The difference is related to the
[PAX9](PAX9 "wikilink"), and [MSX1](MSX1 "wikilink") gene (and perhaps
other genes).[19][20][21][22]

### Age of eruption

There is significant variation between the reported age of eruption of
wisdom teeth between different populations.[23] For example, wisdom
teeth tend to erupt earlier in people with African heritage compared to
people of Asian and European heritage.[24]

Generally wisdom teeth erupt most commonly between age 17 and 21.[25]
Eruption may start as early as age 13 in some groups[26] and typically
occurs before the age of 25.[27] If they have not erupted by age 25,
oral surgeons generally consider that the tooth will not erupt
spontaneously.[28]

Root development can continue for up to three years after eruption
occurs.[29]

## Function

Anthropologists believe wisdom teeth, or the third set of molars, serve
to help chew food in the adult, in humans and in apes and monkeys, who
all have wisdom teeth too,[30] in their diet of harder to chew food –
like fresh fruit, leaves, roots, nuts and meats.[31][32] After the
advent of agriculture over 10,000 years ago, and especially with the
industrial revolution in recent centuries, soft human diets became more
common, including the use of tools (cutting the food) and cooking to
make food easier to chew. Such diets typically result in jaws growing
less in certain parts than those of paleolithic humans and not enough
room for the wisdom teeth.[33]

## Clinical significance

Wisdom teeth (often notated clinically as **M3** for third molar) have
long been identified as a source of problems and continue to be the most
commonly impacted teeth in the human mouth. Impaction of the wisdom
teeth results in a risk of periodontal disease and [dental
cavities](dental_caries "wikilink").[34] Impacted wisdom teeth lead to
pathology in 12% of cases.[35] 

Impacted wisdom teeth are classified by the
[direction](Tooth_impaction#Angulation_of_tooth "wikilink") and [depth
of
impaction](Tooth_impaction#Relationship_of_tooth_to_occlusal_plane "wikilink"),
the [amount of available space for tooth
eruption](Tooth_impaction#Relationship_of_tooth_to_anterior_border_of_ramus "wikilink")
and the amount of soft tissue or bone that covers them. The
classification structure allows clinicians to estimate the probabilities
of impaction, infections and complications associated with wisdom teeth
removal.[36] Wisdom teeth are also classified by the presence of
symptoms and disease.[37]

Treatment of an erupted wisdom tooth is the same as any other tooth in
the mouth. If [impacted](Impacted_wisdom_teeth "wikilink") and having a
pathology, such as [caries](Tooth_decay "wikilink") or pericoronitis,
treatment can be [dental restoration](dental_restoration "wikilink") for
cavities and for pericoronitis, salt water rinses, local treatment to
the infected tissue overlying the impaction,[38] oral
[antibiotics](antibiotic "wikilink"), surgical removal of excess gum
flap (operculectomy), or if those failed, extraction or
[coronectomy](coronectomy "wikilink").

The [National Health Service](National_Health_Service "wikilink") in the
[UK](United_Kingdom "wikilink") recommends people go to dental check-ups
every 3-24 months, depending on the state of the teeth and gums and the
recommendation of the dentist. [39]

### Common pathologies associated with wisdom teeth

[Odontogenic infections](Odontogenic_infection "wikilink") are a dental
complication originating inside the tooth or in close proximity to the
surrounding tissues. There are different types of odontogenic infections
which may affect impacted wisdom teeth such as
[periodontitis](periodontitis "wikilink"),
[pulpitis](pulpitis "wikilink"), dental abscess and
[pericoronitis](pericoronitis "wikilink").

Pericoronitis is a common pathology of impacted third molar.[40] It is
an acute localized infection of the tissue surrounding the impacted
wisdom teeth. Clinically the tissue appears to be red, tender to touch
and edematous. The common symptoms the patient’s report are pain ‘that
ranges from dull to throbbing to intense’ and often radiates to mouth,
ear or floor of the mouth. Moreover, swelling of the cheek,
[halitosis](halitosis "wikilink") and [trismus](trismus "wikilink") can
occur.[41]

### Odontogenic cysts

Odontogenic cysts are a less common pathology of the impacted wisdom
tooth with some estimates of prevalence from 0.64% to 2.24% of impacted
wisdom teeth.[42][43] They are described as ‘cavities filled with
liquid, semiliquid or gaseous content with odontogenic epithelial lining
and connective tissue on the outside’. However, studies have found cysts
to be prevalent in a small percentage of impacted wisdom teeth that are
extracted. The most common types associated with impacted third molars
are [radicular cysts](radicular_cyst "wikilink"), [dentigerous
cysts](dentigerous_cyst "wikilink") and [odontogenic
keratocysts.](Odontogenic_keratocyst "wikilink")[44] Large cysts take
2-13 years to develop.[45]

### Oral hygiene care

Practice and maintenance of good oral hygiene can help prevent and
control some wisdom tooth pathologies. In addition to twice daily
toothbrushing, [interdental cleaning](interdental_cleaning "wikilink")
is recommended to ensure plaque build doesn’t occur in interdental
areas. There are various products available for this – dental floss and
interdental brushes being the most common.

### Removal of impacted wisdom teeth

Removal of asymptomatic [impacted wisdom
teeth](impacted_wisdom_teeth "wikilink") with the absence of disease and
no evidence of local infection as a prophylactic method has been
disputed within the dental community for a long time. There is
insufficient reliable scientific evidence for dental health
professionals and policy makers to determine if asymptomatic
disease-free impacted wisdom teeth should be removed. Therefore, the
decision will depend on a combination of clinical expertise and patient
preference. If the tooth is retained, regular check-ups to identify any
problems that may occur is recommended. Considering the lack of quality
evidence at present, more long-term studies need to be undertaken to
obtain a reliable scientific conclusion.[46]

### Mandibular third molar surgery recovery

[Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF)](Platelet-rich_fibrin "wikilink") is a
postoperative method used to heal the alveolar socket following the
removal of the mandibular third molar. PRF is a second generation result
of the isolation of platelets, white blood cells, stem cells and growth
factors from blood samples. Studies have shown that when used there are
improvements in pain sensations, swelling and a decreased risk of
developing dry socket. This method was shown to only reduce symptoms and
is not completely preventive. To date there is no clear correlation
between the use of PRF after a mandibular third molar removal surgery
and the recovery of jaw spasms, bone restoration and soft tissue
healing. Further studies with larger study samples are needed to
validate current theories.[47]

### Prognosis

About a third of symptomatic unerupted wisdom teeth have been shown to
partially erupt and be non-functional or non-hygienic. Studies have also
shown that 30% to 60% of people with previously asymptomatic impacted
wisdom teeth will have an extraction of at least one of them in 4 to 12
years from diagnosis.[48]

### Risk factors of inferior alveolar nerve damage

Temporary and permanent [inferior alveolar
nerve](inferior_alveolar_nerve "wikilink") (IAN) damage is a known
complication of the surgical removal of impacted lower third molars,
happening in 1 in 85 patients and 1 in 300 extractions, respectively.
Studies have shown that certain risk factors may increase the likelihood
of IAN damage. Proximity of the impacted third molar root to the
[mandibular canal](mandibular_canal "wikilink"), which can be seen in
radiographs, has been shown to be a high-risk factor for IAN damage.
Alongside this, the depth of impaction of the tooth, surgical technique
and surgeons experience are all contributing risk factors for IAN damage
during this procedure. Careful case-by-case consideration is crucial to
avoid this risk.[49]

### Lower anterior teeth crowding

Lower anterior teeth crowding has been a common discussion among the
orthodontic community for decades. In the 1970s it was thought that
unerupted wisdom teeth produced a forward directed force which would
cause crowding of the anterior segment. Recent research has shown that
there is no agreed opinion and that the cause is due to a variety of
factors. This includes dental factors such as tooth crown size and
primary tooth loss. Skeletal factors which include growth of the maxilla
and mandible and the presence of
[malocclusions](malocclusions "wikilink"). General factors, including
the age and gender of the patient. Overall, recent research has
suggested that wisdom teeth alone do not cause crowding of teeth. [50]
